Tapan Sen Majumdar vs The West Bengal State Electricity ... on 15 July, 2022 

 Author: Sabyasachi Bhattacharyya 

 Bench: Sabyasachi Bhattacharyya 

 In the High Court at Calcutta
 Constitutional Writ Jurisdiction
 Appellate Side

The Hon ble Justice Sabyasachi Bhattacharyya

 W.P.A. No. 14580 of 2015

 Tapan Sen Majumdar
 Vs.
 The West Bengal State Electricity Distribution Company Limited and
 others

 For the petitioner : Mr. Sanjay Mukherjee

 For the WBSEDCL : Mr. Sumit Kumar Panja,
 Mr. Sumit Ray

 Hearing concluded on : 11.07.2022

 Judgment on : 15.07.2022

 Sabyasachi Bhattacharyya, J:-

1. The petitioner has sought for a direction for refund of Rs.81,668/-

 along with interest, that is, the amount paid by the petitioner on

 account of a provisional bill raised by the West Bengal State

 Electricity Distribution Company Limited (WBSEDCL) on the

 allegation of theft.

2. Learned counsel for the petitioner contends that the only allegation

 made in the provisional bill dated June 18, 2007 was that, allegedly,

 the petitioner had consumed electricity of an entire commercial

 premises by bypassing of meter by tapping from the service wire

 through another PVC wire.

3. In the complaint made before the Inspector-in-Charge, Bankura

 Police Station, it was also alleged that during inspection it was found

 that the petitioner was consuming electricity by theft with the help of

 bypassing device after bypassing the meter. It is argued that theft is

 a common ingredient between unauthorised use of electricity as

 envisaged in Section 126 of the Electricity Act, 2003 (hereinafter

 referred to as the 2003 Act ) and Section 135 of the 2003 Act.Since

 the petitioner was honourably acquitted in connection with the theft

 case under Section 135 , the petitioner is automatically exonerated

 from liability under Section 126 .

4. Since the amount paid by the petitioner pursuant to an order of co-ordinate Bench in a different writ petition was on account of fifty per

 cent of the provisional bill, it is submitted that the petitioner is

 entitled to refund of the entire amount with interest.

5. Learned counsel for the petitioner next contends that no final order of

 assessment was ever passed by the WBSEDCL in respect of the

 petitioner s electricity meter. As such, although the petitioner was

 given the opportunity to file objection to the provisional assessment

 order, there was no hearing on the same for the purpose of passing a

 final order of assessment, thus precluding the petitioner from

 preferring a challenge under Section 127 of the 2003 Act.

6. It is submitted that Section 154(6) of the 2003 Act contemplates

 refund in case of excess payment having been made on account of

 provisional bill. In the present case, since the provisional bill stands

 obliterated in view of the acquittal of the petitioner on the self-same

 ground of theft in the criminal case, the petitioner is entitled to such

 refund.

7. It is contended that no basis, as envisaged under Section 126(5) of

 the 2003 Act, has been disclosed in the provisional bill for arriving at

 the quantum of dues, thereby vitiating the said bill.

8. Learned counsel for the petitioner further contends that since the

 petitioner did not get any opportunity to prefer an appeal under

 Section 127 of the 2003 Act due to no final assessment order being

 passed, the writ petition is maintainable under Article 226 of the

 Constitution of India, in the absence of alternative remedy being

 available to the petitioner.

9. By distinguishing the judgment reported at (2020) 18 SCC 588 [West

 Bengal State Electricity Distribution company Limited and others Vs.

 Orion Metal Private Limited and another], learned counsel submits

 that it was held therein that two parallel proceedings can proceed

 under Sections 26 and 135 on the same allegation of unauthorised

 use of electricity, however, the said judgment reflects a basis of

 assessing provisional bill under Section 126 , which is absent in the

 present case. Moreover, it was not decided therein as to whether the

 liability under Section 126 subsists even after acquittal of the

 consumer in the criminal case under Section 135 . In fact, it is

 contended, there was no occasion for the Supreme Court to consider

 the effect of exoneration in a proceeding under Section 135 .

10. Insofar as the judgment reported at (2012) 8 SCC 108 [Executive

 Engineer, Southern Electricity Supply Company of Orissa Limited

 (SOUTHCO) and another Vs. Sri Seetaram Rice Mill] is concerned, it is

 argued by learned counsel for the petitioner that, in the said case,

 Section 135 of the 2003 Act did not fall for consideration. It was a

 judgment on Section 126 of the 2003 Act simpliciter and the basis of

 assessment was disclosed in the said judgment. However, in the

 present case, it is an admitted position that the meter reading could

 not be taken in respect of the alleged defaulting meter.

11. Learned counsel for the petitioner also cites a Division Bench

 judgment of the Allahabad High Court rendered in Sandeep

 Kesarwani Vs. State of U.P., reported at MANU/UP/1049/2014,to

 indicate that the ground of theft is common in respect of Sections 126 

 and 135 of the 2003 Act.It is further submitted, by placing reliance

 on an unreported judgment of this Court dated February 15, 2022

 passed in WPA No.19463 of 2021 with WPA No.12586 of 2013

 [Sukumar Das Vs. The West Bengal State Electricity Distribution

 Company Limited and another], that in the event the charge of theft is

 established and the consumer is acquitted by the criminal court, no

 liability remains under Section 126 of the 2003 Act.

12. Insofar as a previous complaint lodged by the petitioner on similar

 grounds before the Consumer Forum is concerned, the matter had

 ultimately gone up to the National Commission which refused to

 interfere on the ground that the Consumer Forum had no jurisdiction

 to take up the dispute.

13. Learned counsel for the respondent-Authorities submits, by placing 

 reliance on Orion Metal (supra) and Seetaram Rice Mill (supra) that the

 Supreme Court amply elaborated the scope of operation of Sections

 126 and 135 of the 2003 Act therein.It was held categorically that the

 two proceedings can run parallelly and are distinct from each other in

 their respective scopes of operation.
 
 14. It is contended by the respondents that the provisional assessment

 order was previously challenged and that no objection had been filed

 by the petitioner to the provisional assessment. As such, a final order

 of assessment, even if were to be passed, would merely be a replica of

 the provisional assessment.
 
 15. However, in that context, learned counsel for the petitioner points out

 that it is stated in the writ petition that the petitioner had filed an

 objection to the provisional assessment, which has not been

 specifically denied by the respondent-Authorities in its opposition.

 16. It is further contended that Section 154 of the 2003 Act, particularly,

 the Explanation thereto, does not deal with a liability under Section

 126 and, as such, does not come to the aid of the petitioner in the

 present case.
 
 17. In view of the provisional assessment order being previously

 challenged, it is submitted, the present challenge is not maintainable.

 Moreover, it is argued that in view of the provision of appeal under

 Section 127 , which is an equally efficacious alternative remedy, the

 writ petition ought to be dismissed.
 
 18. A comparative study of Sections 126 and 135 of the 2003 Act shows

 that theft or pilferage is a common ground both in unauthorised

 use and theft as dealt with by the said Sections respectively.

 Explanation (b) to Section 126 defines unauthorised use of

 electricity to mean the use of electricity through a tempered meter,

 which is also a part of the definition of theft of electricity.

 19. As per the judgment cited by the parties, it is well-settled that the two

 provisions, that is, Section 126 and 135 , operate in separate fields

 and parallel proceedings under both provisions may concurrently

 run. Whereas Section 126 deals with a civil liability, Section 135 is

 about criminal liability. The standards of proof in case of both are

 different. Whereas in a proceeding under Section 135 , the charge of

 theft has to be established beyond reasonable doubt in consonance

 with the standard of criminal courts, in case of Section 126 ,

 preponderance of probability is the yardstick to assess materials for

 coming to a conclusion in respect of provisional bill.

 20. In the present case, it is seen from the provisional assessment bill

 (Annexure P-2 at page 18 of the writ petition) that the same was

 raised on the ground of malpractice and theft of energy by way of

 bypassing the meter by tapping from the service wire through another

 PVC wire. The allegation of malpractice and unauthorised use was

 entirely based on such allegation.
 
 21. On the other hand, the complaint lodged by the WBSEDCL on June

 16, 2007 before the Inspector-in-Charge, Bankura Police Station

 (Annexure P-1 at page 17 of the writ petition) reveals that the

 consumer was allegedly consuming electricity by theft with the help of

 bypassing devise after bypassing the meter.

 22. The time of commission of the alleged offence has been mentioned in

 both the provisional bill and the complaint to be between 15.15 hrs

 and 16.30 hrs which are identical.
 
 23. Hence, there cannot be any doubt that the proceeding under Section

 135 and the provisional assessment under Section 126 were on the

 basis of the self-same allegation.
 
 24. The standard of proof, as discussed earlier, is stricter in a criminal

 proceeding in a proceeding under Section 135 of the 2003 Act. The

 allegation has to be proved in such a case beyond reasonable doubt,

 which is of a far higher degree then preponderance of probability,

 which is applicable to an assessment under Section 126 of the 2003

 Act.
 
 25. It is seen from the materials-on-record thatthe petitioner was

 acquitted in the criminal case on the allegation of theft.

 26. Even as per Seetaram Rice Mill (supra), the High Court can interfere

 with a provisional order of assessment under Article 226 , since no

 appeal under Section 127 of the 2003 Act is available against the

 same.
 
 27. Although it was held in Orion Metal (supra) that two parallel

 proceedings are maintainable and can go on simultaneously under

 Sections 126 and 135 of the 2003 Act, it has been clarified further

 that all instances of unauthorised use of energy, although may not

 amount to theft within the meaning of Section 135 , but at the same

 time, the theft of electricity, which is covered by Section 135 of the

 Act, will fall within the definition of unauthorised use of electricity .

 Tampered meter is a common ground for both the said Sections and

 is the only allegation levelled against the petitioner in the present

 case in both the proceedings under Section 126 and 135 of the 2003

 Act. Since the petitioner has been acquitted scot-free in the criminal

 proceeding under Section 135 on the self-same allegation, it cannot

 be said that, on a preponderance of probability, the petitioner can be

 indicted for the same charge.
 
 28. Inasmuch as availability of Section 127 is concerned, no such appeal

 lay in the present case, since no final order of assessment was made

 by the WBSEDCL at any point of time. Even if the petitioner had not

 filed a written objection to the provisional assessment, it was the

 incumbent duty of the distribution licensee to pass a final order of

 assessment within 30 days from the date of service of the order of

 provisional assessment on the consumer, in terms of sub-section (3)

 of Section 26 of the 2003 Act.
 
 29. Although the provisional assessment bill, annexed at page 18,

 indicates that a calculation sheet was enclosed therewith, there is

 nothing on record to indicate that the assessment had been made in

 terms of sub-section (5) of Section 126 of the Act.

 30. In any event, since no final order of assessment was drawn up on the

 basis of the provisional assessment, the provisional order of

 assessment spent its force after 30 days from service of the

 provisional assessment order on the petitioner.

 31. That apart, the allegation made by the petitioner in the writ petition,

 that a written objection was filed to the provisional assessment

 bill,having been, at best, evasivelydenied in the affidavit-in-opposition

 by the WBSEDCL, it has to be deemed that a written objection was

 actually filed by the petitioner. However, no opportunity of hearing

 was given to the petitioner on the provisional assessment bill, let

 alone taking into consideration the written objection.

 32. The proposition laid down by the Division Bench of the Allahabad

 High Court in Sandeep Kesarwani (supra) strengthens the proposition

 advanced by the petitioner, inasmuch as no final order of assessment

 was passed within 30 days as per Section 126(3) of the 2003 Act in

 the said case as well.
 
 33. Inasmuch as Sukumar Das (supra) is concerned, the consideration

 therein was different from the instant case, inasmuch as the

 provisional order of assessment was never served on the petitioner in

 the saidcase. As such, the provisional and final assessment orders in

 the said matter were observed to be not binding on the petitioner-consumer.
 
 34. Inasmuch as Section 154 of the 2003 Act is concerned, the

 Explanation to sub-section (6) thereof indicates that, for the purposes

 of the said Section, civil liability means loss or damage incurred by

 the Board or licensee or the concerned person, as the case may be,

 due to the commission of an offence referred to in Sections 135 to

 140. Although Section 126 has been kept out of the purview of the

 said Explanation, the only occasion of a civil liability , loss or damage

 incurred by the licensee due to commission of an offence referred to

 in Section 135 of the Act, can arise under sub-section (5)

 whichprovides that the Special Court shall determine the civil liability

 against a consumer or a person in terms of money for theft of energy

 which shall not be less than an amount equivalent two times of the

 tariff rate applicable for a period of twelve months preceding the date

 of detection of theft of energy or the exact period of theft if

 determined, whichever is less. It further provides that the amount of

 civil liability so determined, shall be recovered as if it were a decree of

 a civil court.
 
 35. Sub-section (5) of Section 154 further provides that, in case of civil

 liability so determined finally by the Special Court being less than the

 amount deposited by the consumer or the person, the excess amount

 which was deposited by the consumer to the licensee shall be

 refunded by the licensee within a fortnight from the date of

 communication of the order of the Special Court together with

 interest at the prevailing Reserve Bank of India prime lending rate for

 the period from the date of such deposit till the date of payment.

 36. It transpires from a proper interpretation of Section 154(6) that the

 Explanation thereto refers to the civil liability as specified in sub-section (5) of Section 154 and not the amount raised as provisional

 assessment under Section 126 of the Act.
 
 37. Be that as it may, since it has been observed above that the

 provisional assessment bill raised by the WBSEDCL spent its force

 and cannot stand in the view of the acquittal of the petitioner on the

 self-same allegation in the proceeding under Section 135 of the 2003

 Act, it is only appropriate that the petitioner is directed to refund

 whatever amount was paid by the petitioner in connection with the

 proceeding under Section 126 .
 
 38. It is revealed from Annexure P-3 at page 19 of the writ petition, which

 is a copy of an order dated June 26, 2007 passed by a co-ordinate

 bench in WP No.13447(W) of 2007, that the petitioner was directed to

 pay fifty per cent of the amount specified in the provisional bill dated

 June 18, 2007, that is, Rs.1,63,335/-, which comes to Rs.81,668/-.

 39. Accordingly, WPA No.14580 of 2015 is allowed, thereby directing the

 WBSEDCL to refund the amount of Rs.81,668/- with interest at the

 rate of 6 (six) per cent from the date of deposit of the said amount

 pursuant to the order dated June 26, 2007 till such payment is made

 to the petitioner.
 
 40. There will be no order as to costs.
 
 41. Urgent certified copies of this order shall be supplied to the parties

 applying for the same, upon due compliance of all requisite

 formalities.
 
 

 ( Sabyasachi Bhattacharyya, J. )

Later:
 
 Learned counsel for the WBSEDCL seeks a stay of operation of the

above order.
 
 
 Such prayer is opposed by learned counsel for the petitioner.

 Since certain questions of interpretation of law are involved, such stay

is granted till August 15, 2022.
 
 
 ( Sabyasachi Bhattacharyya, J. )
