Odisha Power Generation Corporation ... vs State Of Odisha Another on 30 March, 2015 

 Equivalent citations: AIR 2015 ORISSA 128 

 Author: I.Mahanty 

 Bench: I.Mahanty 

 ORISSA HIGH COURT: CUTTACK
 W.P.(C) No.17017 of 2014


 In the matter of an application under Articles 226 and 227 of the
 Constitution of India.

 --------------

 Odisha Power Generation Corporation Ltd. ...Petitioner

 -Versus-

 State of Odisha another ...Opposite Parties


 For petitioner : Mr.N.Venkataraman
 (Sr. Advocate)
 M/s. Satyajit Mohanty,
 D.P.Sahu, S. Das 
 D.K. Mohanty

 For Opp. Parties : Mr.R.P.Kar
 (Standing Counsel for Revenue)

 ------------
 P R E S E N T:
 THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE I.MAHANTY
 AND
 THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE B.N. MAHAPATRA

 Date of Judgment : 30.03.2015

B.N. Mahapatra, J. Petitioner-Odisha Power Generation Corporation Ltd.

 in the present writ petition challenges the order of assessment dated

 03.05.2014 (Annexure-6 series) passed by the Joint Commissioner of

 Sales Tax, Sambalpur Range, Sambalpur (fort short, Assessing

 Authority ) under Section 9C of the Orissa Entry Tax Act, 1999 (for

 short, OET Act ) for the period 01.04.2011 to 31.03.2013 levying
 2 



additional entry tax at the rate of 0.5% amounting to Rs.2,40,81,536/-

and penalty amounting to Rs.4,81,63,072/- on coal used by the

petitioner-Company as raw material for generation of electricity on the

ground that such levy is illegal, arbitrary and barred by limitation and

outcome of non-application of mind, without jurisdiction and contrary to

the provisions of OET Act.
 
 2. Petitioner s case in a nut-shell is that it is a Government of

Odisha Undertaking incorporated under the Companies Act, 1956 and a

joint venture of Government of Odisha and AES of USA having main

objects to establish, operate and maintain power generating stations and

tielines, sub-stations and main transmission line connected therewith. In

other words, the petitioner is engaged in business of generation of

electricity and distribution thereof in the State of Odisha. Ib Thermal

Power Station (ITPS) is one of the thermal power generation units of the

petitioner-Company situated at Ib Valley area in the district of

Jharsuguda, Odisha. The petitioner has also set up mini hydel projects

for furtherance of its business to achieve its objects. It is registered

under the Orissa Value Added Tax Act, 2004 (for short OVAT Act ) and

OET Act and in the said registration certificate it has been authorized to

purchase coal as raw-material for generation of electricity. The petitioner

having thermal power plant is engaged in manufacture and distribution

of electricity. It uses coal as primary/only raw-material in its thermal

power plant for manufacture of electricity. Petitioner purchases coal for

use as raw-material from Mahanadi Coal Fields Ltd. in Lakhanpur area.
 3 



In thermal power plant, chemical energy in coal gets converted to heat

energy which in turn gets converted to mechanical energy which

ultimately gets converted to electrical energy.

 Further case of the petitioner is that coal being raw-material

in manufacture of electricity, it is entitled to the benefit of concessional

levy of entry tax in terms of Rule 3 of OET Rules. The petitioner brings

coal into local area for manufacture of electricity and has also furnished

declaration in Form- E15 to its seller. During the period of assessment,

the petitioner purchased coal for consumption in its power plant as raw-

material at a cost of Rs.482,63,03,305.63 and paid entry tax thereon at

the rate of 0.5% amounting to Rs.2,41,31,516.52. On the basis of audit

visit report, the Assessing Authority passed the impugned assessment

order denying the concessional rate of entry tax on coal without affording

reasonable opportunity of hearing to the petitioner and without

considering written note of submissions in its proper perspective. Hence,

the present writ petition.
 
 3. Mr.N.Venkataraman, learned Senior Advocate appearing for

the petitioner submitted that coal is primary and important raw-material

for generation of electricity as held by this Court in the case of Bhushan

Power and Steel Limited Vs. State of Orissa , (2012) 56 VST 50

(Orissa). Hence, coal is exigible to entry tax at concessional rate in terms

of Rule 3(4) of OET Rules. 
 
 The Assessing Authority has grossly failed to appreciate the

judgment rendered by this Court in Bhushan Power and Steel Limited 
 4 



(supra) including the other judgment in NALCO in [W.P.(C) No.1597 and

1686 of 2012] relied upon by the petitioner before the Assessing

Authority. Decision of this Court in Bhushan Power and Steel Limited 

(supra) holding that coal is a raw-material for the purpose of generating

electricity has not been followed by the Assessing Authority on the

ground that such finding of this Court is a cursory remark, i.e., Obiter

Dicta and the said judgment having been challenged before the Hon ble

Supreme Court, ratio decided in that case has no application to the

present case. The above reasons given by the learned Assessing

Authority for not following the decision of this Court is impermissible in

law. 
 
 4. Coal has been mentioned as an item required to be

purchased for generation of electricity in the registration certificate and

the petitioner during relevant time was purchasing coal from MCL

furnishing declaration in Form E-15 in terms of Rule 3(5) of OET Rules

stating therein that coal purchased shall be used for production of

finished product, i.e., electricity.
 
 5. It was further submitted that manufacture means bringing

into existence a new substance. In other words, manufacture implies

that when a change takes place a new and distinct article comes into

existence known as a commercial product, which can be no longer

regarded as the original commodity. Any process or processes creating

something else having a distinct name, character and use would be

manufacture. In the instant case, coal is used by the petitioner at its
 5 



thermal power station at IB Valley area as a raw-material for generation

of electricity by which process coal loses its characteristics and is

transformed into electricity which is a finished product. Hence, the

finding of opposite party No.2 in the impugned assessment order that

generation of electricity cannot be equated with manufacturing activity is

illegal and unsustainable.
 
 6. Placing reliance on the judgment of the Hon ble Supreme

Court in the case of Collector of Central Excise, New Delhi vs. Ballarapur

Industries Ltd., [1990] 77 STC 282 (SC), it was submitted that coal is a

raw material for production of electricity. Further relying upon the

judgment of this Court in the case of Orient Paper Industries Ltd. vs.

Orissa State Electricity Board , (1989) 42 ELT 552 (Ori), Mr. Venkatraman

submitted that electricity is a good and generation of electricity involves

manufacturing activities. 
 
 7. Mr.R.P.Kar, learned Standing Counsel appearing on behalf of

the Revenue while supporting the order of assessment submitted that the

impugned order of assessment has been passed duly complying with the

statutory provisions. It was submitted that electricity is not an

article/good which is required to be produced in terms of Rule 2(1)(c) of

OET Rules. It was further argued that a joint reading of Section 26 of the

OET Act and Rule 3 of the OET Rules makes it clear that only when

goods purchased as raw material and used in manufacturing of goods for

sale i.e. goods which go into composition of the finished product will be

eligible for concessional rate of entry tax as provided in sub-rule (4) of
 6 



Rule 3 of the OET Rules. Referring to the counter affidavit filed in

another connected case, Mr. Kar submitted that in the present case,

since generation of electricity is not a manufacturing activity and coal is

not a raw material for generation of electricity, the petitioner is not

entitled to avail the concessional rate of entry tax in terms of Rule 3(4) of

OET Rules. In support of his contention, Mr. Kar relied upon the decision

of the Hon ble Supreme Court in the case of Union of India vs.

Ahmedabad Electricity Co. Ltd. and others , (2004) 134 STC 24 (SC). 

 8. On the rival contentions of the parties, the following

questions fall for consideration by this Court.

 (i) Whether generation of electricity is a
 manufacturing activity?
 (ii) Whether electricity is an article/a good as
 referred to in Section 2(28) of the OVAT Act
 which defines the expression manufacture ?
 (iii) Whether coal is a raw-material for generation of
 electricity in thermal power station?
 (iv) If the answers to question (i), (ii) and (iii) are
 affirmative whether the petitioner is entitled to
 avail concessional rate of entry tax on coal in
 terms of Rule 3(4) of the OET Rules?
 
 9. Question No.(i) is whether generation of electricity is a

manufacturing activity.
 
 The expression manufacture is not defined in the OET Act.

However, Rule 2(1)(c) of the OET Rules provides that manufacture with

all its grammatical variations and cognate expressions, means a dealer or
 7 



a person in the business of manufacture as defined in the Orissa Value

Added Tax Act, 2004 .
 
 10. Section 2(q) of the OET Act provides as follows:

 2(q) Words and expressions used in OET Act and
 not defined in the said Act, but defined in the OVAT
 Act shall have the same meaning respectively
 assigned to them in that Act. 
 
 11. Section 2(28) of the OVAT Act defines manufacture as
under:
 2(28) Manufacture means any activity that brings
 out a change in an article or articles as a result of
 some process, treatment, labour and results in
 transaction into a new and different article so
 understood in commercial parlance having a distinct
 name, character and use, but does not include such
 activity or manufacture as may be notified. 
 
 12. It may be relevant to mention here that law is well-settled

that where an expression under the Act has been defined, the said

expression will have the same meaning and it is not necessary to find out

what is the general meaning of the expression.
 
 13. The Hon ble Supreme Court in the case of S.Gopal Reddy

Vs. State of A.P. , (1996) 4 SCC 596 at page 607 held that where

definition has been given in a statute itself, it is neither proper nor

desirable to look to the dictionaries etc. to find out the meaning of

expression. The definition given in the statute is the determinative factor. 

 14. The Hon ble Supreme Court in the case of Dy. CST Vs. Pio

Food Packers, 1980 (Supp) SCC 174 at page 176 held that only when the

change, or a series of changes, take the commodity to the point where

commercially it can no longer be regarded as the original commodity but
 8 



instead is recognized as a new and distinct article that a manufacture can

be said to take place.
 
 15. The Hon ble Supreme Court in Collector of Central Excise,

Bombay-II Vs. M/s. Kiran Spinning Mills, (1988) 2 SCC 348 at page

355 held as follows:
 
 It is true that etymological word manufacture 
 properly construed would doubtless cover the
 transformation but the question is whether that
 transformation brings about fundamental change, a
 new substance is brought into existence or a new
 different article having distinctive name, character
 or use results from a particular process or a
 particular activity. 
 
 16. In Collector of Central Excise, Madras Vs. M/s. Kutty

Flush Doors Furniture Co. (P) Ltd., (1988) Suppl. SCC 239 at page

240, the Hon ble Supreme Court held as follows:
 
 3. It may be worthwhile to note that manufacture 
 implies a change, but every change is not
 manufacture and yet every change of an article is
 the result of treatment, labour and manipulation.
 But something more was necessary and there must
 be transformation, a new and different article must
 emerge having a distinct name, character or use. 

 17. The Hon ble Supreme Court in the case of Collector of

Central Excise, Jaipur Vrs. Rajasthan State Chemical Works,

Deedwana, Rajasthan, AIR 1991 (SC) 2222 held as follows:-

 ....Process in manufacture or in relation to
 manufacture implies not only the production
 but the various stages through which the raw
 material is subjected to change by different
 operations. It is the cumulative effect of the
 various processes to which the raw material is
 subjected to (sic that the) manufactured
 product emerges. Therefore, each step towards
 9 



 such production would be a process in relation
 to the manufacture. Where any particular
 process is so integrally connected with the
 ultimate production of goods that but for that
 process manufacture or processing of goods
 would be impossible or commercially
 inexpedient, that process is one in relation to
 the manufacture. 
 
 18. This Court in the case of Orient Paper Industries Ltd. 

(supra) while interpreting Section 2(b) of the Central Excise and Salt Act,

1944 has held that generation of electricity for the purpose of Central

Excise and Salt Act is manufacture or production of electricity , since

the term manufacture or production is to be given a wide meaning. 

 19. In view of the definition of manufacture as provided in

 Section 2(28) of OVAT Act read with Rule 2(1)(c) of the OET Rules and

Section 2(q) of the OET Act and all the above judicial pronouncements of

the Hon ble Supreme Court and High Court, we are of the considered

view that the activity of generating electricity in thermal power plant by

using coal would qualify as a manufacturing activity.

 20. Question No.(ii) is as to whether electricity is an article/a

good as referred to in Section 2(28) of the OVAT Act which defines the

expression manufacture .
 
 We need not retain ourselves for a longer period to

adjudicate this question in view of the decision of the Hon ble Supreme

Court in the case of Commissioner of Sales Tax, Madhya Pradesh,

Indore Vs. Madhya Pradesh Electricity Board, Jabalpur , (1969) 1

SCC 200 at page 204, wherein it has been held as under: 
 10 



 What has essentially to be seen is whether electric
 energy is goods within the meaning of the relevant
 provisions of the two Acts. The definition in terms is
 very wide according to which goods means all
 kinds of movable property. Then certain items are
 specifically excluded or included and electric energy
 or electricity is not one of them. The term movable
 property when considered with reference to goods 
 as defined for the purposes of sales tax cannot be
 taken in a narrow sense and merely because electric
 energy is not tangible or cannot be moved or
 touched like, for instance, a piece of wood or a book
 it cannot cease to be movable property when it has
 all the attributes of such property. It is needless to
 repeat that it is capable of abstraction, consumption
 and use which, if done dishonestly, would attract
 punishment under s.39 of the Indian Electricity Act,
 1910. It can be transmitted, transferred, delivered,
 stored, possessed etc. in the same way as any other
 movable property. Even in Banjamin on Sale, 8th
 Edn., reference has been made at page 171 to
 County of Durham Electrical, etc., Co. v. Inland
 Revenue (1) in which electric energy was assumed to
 be goods . If there can be sale and purchase of
 electric energy like any other movable object we see
 no difficulty in holding that electric energy was
 intended to be covered by the definition of goods in
 the two Acts. If that had not been the case there was
 no necessity of specifically exempting sale of electric
 energy from the payment of sales tax by making a
 provision for it in the Schedules to the two Acts. It
 cannot be denied that the Electricity Board carried
 on principally the business of selling, supplying or
 distributing electric energy. It would therefore
 clearly fall within the meaning of the expression
 dealer in the two Acts. 
 
 [Also see State of A.P. vs. National Thermal Power Corporation
Ltd. and Others , (2002) 127 STC 280 (SC)] 

 21. In view of the above decisions of the Hon ble Supreme Court,

electricity is an article as referred to in Section 2(28) of the OVAT Act

read with Rule 2(1)(c) of OET Rules which define manufacture .
 11 



 22. Question No.(iii) is whether coal is a raw-material for

generation of electricity in thermal power plant.

 The processes that are involved in manufacture/generation/

production of electricity as narrated in the written submission filed by

the petitioner before the Assessing Authority and not disputed by the

opposite party-Department, are as follows:-
 
 (a) Coal is the primary material for power
 generation;
 (b) In a Thermal Power Plant chemical energy
 available in Coal is converted into electricity;
 (c) Coal is fed into a boiler along with water and air;
 (d) Coal is fired to heat the water and resulting in
 generation of steam;
 (e) Chemical energy in coal gets converted into heat
 energy and the same is carried by steam which
 acts as a medium to the Turbine;
 (f) The high pressure steam impinges and expands
 across a number of blades in the turbine and
 thereby rotating the turbine;
 (g) In the process heat energy carried through steam
 gets converted into mechanical energy;
 (h) Mechanical energy gets converted to electrical
 energy based on Faradey s principle of
 electromagnetic induction.
 (i) In other words, chemical energy in coal gets
 converted to heat energy which in turn gets
 converted to mechanical energy which ultimately
 gets converted to electrical energy.
 
 23. The above process clearly demonstrates that coal is the

primary raw-material for generation/production of electricity in thermal

power plant and without coal, no electricity can be produced/generated/

manufactured.
 
 24. In Ballarapur Industries Ltd., (supra), the Hon ble

Supreme Court held as under:
 12 




 5. The question, in the ultimate analysis, is whether
the input of Sodium Sulphate in the manufacture of
paper would cease to be a Raw-Material by reason
alone of the fact that in the course of the chemical
reactions this ingredient is consumed and burnt-up.
The expression Raw- Material is not a defined term.
The meaning to be given to it is the ordinary and well-
accepted connotation in the common parlance of those
who deal with the matter.
 
 The ingredients used in the chemical technology of
manufacture of any end-product might comprise,
amongst others, of those which may retain their
dominant individual identity and character throughout
the process and also in the end-product; those which
as a result of interaction with other chemicals or
ingredients, might themselves undergo chemical or
qualitative changes and in such altered form find
themselves in the end-product; those which, like
catalytic agents, while influencing and accelerating the
chemical reactions, however, may themselves remain
uninfluenced and unaltered and remain independent
of and outside the end-products and those, as here,
which might be burnt-up or consumed in the chemical
reactions. The question in the present case is whether
the ingredients of the last mentioned class qualify
themselves as and are eligible to be called Raw
Material for the end-product. One of the valid tests, in
our opinion, could be that the ingredient should be so
essential for the chemical processes culminating in the
emergence of the desired end-product, that having
regard to its importance in and indispensability for the
process, it could be said that its very consumption on
burning-up is its quality and value as raw-material. In
such a case, the relevant test is not its absence in the
end product, but the dependance of the end product
for its essential presence at the delivery and of the
process. The ingredient goes into the making of the
end-product in the sense that without its absence the
presence of the end-product, as such, is rendered
 13 




 impossible. This quality should coalesce with the
 requirement that its utilisation is in the manufacturing
 process as distinct from the manufacturing
 apparatus. 
 
 25. When the processes that are involved in manufacturing/

generation/production of electricity in a thermal plant as narrated in

the preceding paragraph is considered in the light of the above

observation of the Hon ble Supreme Court, it can safely be concluded

that coal is a raw material for production/generation of electricity.

 26. This Court in Bhushan Power and Steel Limited (supra)

held that coal is a raw material for the purpose of generating electricity. 

 27. Apart from the above, perusal of the impugned assessment

order reveals that before the Assessing Authority, the petitioner produced

the expert opinion obtained from IIT, Kharagpur, wherein, it has been

opined that coal is a raw material which results in the emergence of

electricity. The relevant portion of the said report is reproduced herein

below:-
 
 Coal is the prime material for thermal power plants
 converting the embedded chemical energy through
 various stages and finally to electrical energy. The
 first conversion of energy takes place by burning
 Coal as raw material which produces steam as a
 result of boiling water in the boiler. Thereafter, the
 stage is the Thermo dynamic process that produces
 heat energy. In the final stage the steam produced
 as a result of heat energy delivered to the turbine
 rotates the generator, rotor to produce electrical
 energy based on Faradyne s Principles of Electro
 Magnetic Induction.... 
 14 



 Admittedly, the Department has not produced any

acceptable evidence in rebuttal. Therefore, the expert opinion given by

the IIT, Kharagpur has the binding force on the Department.

 28. The Hon ble Supreme Court in the case of Commissioner of

Central Excise Vs. Damnet Chemicals (P) Ltd. , (2007) 7 SCC 490 at

page 495 has held as under:- 
 
 It is well settled and needs no restatement at our
 hands that the test reports given by the Chemical
 Examiner are binding upon the Department in the
 absence of any other acceptable evidence produced
 by it in rebuttal. In the present case, the
 Department has neither produced any evidence to
 rebut the reports of the Chemical Examiner nor
 impeached the findings of the test reports. 
 
 29. The Hon ble Supreme Court in the case of Commissioner,

Sales Tax, U.P. Vs. Bharat Bone Mill , (2007) 4 SCC 136, at page 139

held as under:- 
 
 11. Moreover, it is well-known that the question
 as to whether a commodity would be exigible to
 sales tax or not must be considered having regard to
 its identity in common law parlance. If, applying
 the said test, it is to be borne in mind that if one
 commodity is not ordinarily known as another
 commodity; normally, the provisions of taxing
 statute in respect of former commodity which comes
 within the purview of the taxing statute would be
 allowed to operate. In any event, such a question
 must be determined having regard to the expert
 opinion in the field. We have noticed hereinabove
 the difference between bone meal and crushed
 bone . Different utilities of the said items has also
 been noticed by the Allahabad High Court itself.
 The High Court or for that matter, the Tribunal did
 not have the advantage of opinion of the expert to
 the effect as to whether crushed bones can be used
 only for the purpose of fertilizer or whether crushed
 15 



 bones are sold to the farmers for use thereof only as
 fertilizer. 
 
 30. In view of the above, we are of the considered opinion that

coal is a raw material for production of electricity in thermal plant.

 The facts and the issues involved in Ahmedabad Electricity

Co. Ltd. and others (supra) are completely different from the present case

and therefore, it is of no assistance to the Department. 

 31. Now, let us examine whether the reasons given by the

learned Assessing Authority for disallowing the petitioner s claim to avail

concessional levy of entry tax in terms of Rule 3(4) of the OET Rules are

legally valid.
 
 The reasons assigned by the Assessing Authority to disallow

the petitioner s above claim are as follows:
 
 (a) coal generates steam and steam so generated rotates the

 turbine and in the process of rotation of turbine electricity is

 generated. Therefore, coal does not transform into electricity;
 
 (b) Though coal contains chemical energy that does not convert

 to electric energy;
 
 (c) In absence of any standard input and output ratio between

 coal and generation of electricity, it cannot be said that coal

 is a raw material for consumption of electricity;
 
 (d) In the process of generation of hydro electricity, water

 remains with all its ingredients even after completion of

 process of generation of hydro electricity. Thus, neither
 16 



 water nor coal transforms to hydro electricity and thermal

 power. To strengthening his view, the Assessing Authority

 further observed that does the wind is a raw material for

 non-conventional energy like wind energy, similarly, what is

 the raw material for solar energy?
 
 (e) Generation of thermal power being not manufacturing

 activity, the dealer-company cannot be considered to be a

 manufacturer and as such cannot avail the privilege of

 concessional rate of entry tax granted under Rule 3(4) of the

 OET Rules;
 
 (f) Being burnt coal undergoes a change but every change is not

 a manufacture as held by the Hon ble Supreme Court in the

 case of Kutty Flush Doors and Furniture Co. (supra), hence,

 although coal undergoes the change, yet it cannot be said

 that it transforms into a new article and hence, it does not

 satisfy the condition of transformation from one article or

 another as envisaged under Rule 3(4) of the OET Rules; 
 
 (g) The contention of the dealer that the coal is a raw material for

 the purpose of generating electricity as held by this Court in

 Bhusan Power and Steel Limited (supra) is not a settled ratio

 and it has no application to the case at hand since in that

 case the question before the High Court was as to whether

 coal is a raw material for production of iron and steel and the

 case was not certainly determined or adjudicated as to
 17 



 whether the coal is a raw material for generation of electricity. 
 
 Therefore, the observation of the High Court that coal is a raw

 material for generation of electricity is a cursory remark, i.e.,

 obiter dicta and the said judgment having been challenged in

 the Hon ble Supreme Court and the matter is subjudice, the

 same is not a settled ratio, 

 32. For the following reasons, we feel it extreme difficult to accept

the above reasons given by the Assessing Authority to hold that coal is not

a raw material for generation/production of electricity in thermal power

station and that generation of electricity is not a manufacturing activity

and therefore the petitioner is not entitled to avail concessional rate of

entry tax as provided under Rule 3(4) of the OET Rules.

 (a) It is not the case of the Assessing Authority that without coal
 thermal power which is finished product in a thermal power
 station can be produced and therefore, coal is not a
 primary/principal raw material to generate/produce thermal
 power. On the other hand, use of coal and production of
 electricity in a thermal power plant is an integral process
 and so inextricably connected that no thermal power can be
 produced without use of coal;
 (b) Consumption and output ratio between coal and electricity is
 not necessary/relevant in deciding whether coal is a raw
 material for generation/production of thermal power.
 (c) While adjudicating as to whether coal is a raw material for
 generation/production of thermal power, it is irrelevant to
 find out whether water, wind, solar power are raw material
 for generation of hydro electricity, wind energy and solar
 18 



 energy respectively. Such questions may be adjudicated in
 appropriate case (s).
 (d) There is no dispute over the legal proposition that every
 change in a processing is not manufacture as held by the
 Hon ble Supreme Court in Kutty Flush Doors Furniture Co. 
 (supra). As in the present case a new and different article,
 i.e., electricity energy emerges which is distinct in name,
 character and use from coal , the above case of the Hon ble
 Supreme Court supports the petitioner. 
 (e) While dealing with question Nos. (i) and (iii) above, we have
 already held for the reasons stated therein that generation of
 electricity is a manufacturing activity and coal is a raw
 material for generation/production of electricity.

 33. We are shocked to notice that the learned Assessing

Authority held that the observation of this Court that coal as a raw

material for generation of electricity is a cursory remark, i.e., obiter

dicta and the said judgment having been challenged in the Hon ble

Supreme Court which is subjudice, the same is not a settled ratio and

therefore, the petitioner-company cannot take advantage of the said

decision . In other words , the said decision is not binding on him (on the

Assessing Authority).
 
 34. At this juncture, it would be appropriate to note as to what is

 obiter dicta . The expression obiter means by the way ; in passing ;

 incidentally .
 
 Obiter dictum is the expression of opinion stated in the

judgment by a judge which is unnecessary of a particular case. Obiter
 19 



dicta is an observation which is either not necessary for the decision of

the case or does not relate to the material facts in issue.

 35. Now, let us see whether the observation/finding of this Court

in the case of Bhusan Power Steel Ltd. (supra) that coal is a raw

material for generation of electricity is not necessary for the decision of

the case or such observation does not relate to the material facts in

issue. 
 
 In Bhusan Power Steel case (supra) the petitioner was

engaged in manufacturing of sponge iron, billet and H.R. Coil as well as

generation of power. The petitioner s claim was that coal is required to

manufacture the electricity, which is, in turn, essential to run the plant

for manufacturing sponge iron, billets and HR coil. Therefore, when the

electricity generation is a captive arrangement and the requirement is for

carrying out manufacturing activity, the electricity generation also forms

part of the manufacturing activity and the raw material used in that

electricity generation qualifies for availing of concessional levy of entry

tax in terms of Rule 3(4) of the OET Rules. On the basis of the above

contention of the petitioner, this Court held that requirement of Rule 3(4)

of the OET Rules is that scheduled goods purchased must be used as

raw material in manufacturing the finished product. Thus, those

scheduled goods are exclusively confined to raw material only used in

manufacture of the finished products. The petitioner-company

manufactures sponge iron, billets and HR coil and undisputedly to

manufacture such finished goods the coal is not the raw material. Coal is
 20 



a raw material for the purpose of generating electricity, which is, in turn

essential to run the plant and for that it cannot be said that the coal is a

raw material for manufacturing sponge iron, billets and HR Coil. 

 36. In view of the above analytical discussion of this Court, by

no stretch of imagination, it can be said that the findings/observations of

this Court that coal is a raw material for generation of electricity are

unnecessary for the decision of that case or it does not relate to the

material facts in issue. Therefore, the learned Assessing Authority is

wholly unjustified to hold that the observation of this Court in Bhusan

Power and Steel Ltd. (supra) that coal is a raw material for generation

of electricity is a cursory remark, i.e., obiter dicta. 

 37. It may be relevant to note that the Assessing Authority is not

competent to declare any observation/finding of the High Court as obiter

dicta.
 
 38. Now let us see whether the decision of the High Court is of

binding nature and if so to whom. Undoubtedly, there is no express

provision in the Constitution like Article 141 , in respect of the High

Court, Tribunals within the jurisdiction of the High Court are bound to

follow its judgment, but as the High Court has the power of

superintendence over them under Articles 226 and 227 of the

Constitution, the law declared by the High Court in the State is binding

on them.
 21 



 39. The Hon ble Supreme Court in the case of East India

Commercial Co. Ltd., Calcutta and Another vs. Collector of

Customs, Calcutta , AIR 1962 SC 1893, held as under: 

 We therefore, hold that the law declared by the
 highest court in the state is binding on authorities
 or Tribunals under its superintendence and they
 cannot ignore it. 
 
 40. The Hon ble Supreme Court in the case of Sri Baradakant

Mishra vs. Bhimsen Dixit , (1973) 1 SCC 446, held as follows: 

 15. The conduct of the appellant in not following
 the previous decision of the High Court is calculated
 to create confusion in the administration of law. It
 will undermine respect for law laid down by the
 High Court and impair the Constitutional authority
 of the High Court. His conduct is therefore
 comprehended by the principles underlying the law
 of Contempt. The analogy of the inferior court s
 disobedience to the specific order of a superior court
 also suggests that his conduct falls within the
 purview of the law of Contempt. Just as the
 disobedience to a specific order of the Court
 undermines the authority and dignity of the court in
 a particular case, similarly the deliberate and
 malafide conduct of not following the law laid down
 in the previous decision undermines the
 Constitutional authority and respect of the High
 Court. Indeed, while the former conduct has
 repercussions on an individual case and on a
 limited number of persons, the latter conduct has a
 much wider and more disastrous impact. It is
 calculated not only to undermine the Constitutional
 authority and respect of the High Court, generally,
 but is also likely to subvert the Rule of Law and
 engender harassing uncertainty and confusion in
 the administration of law. 
 
 41. The Hon ble Supreme Court in the case of Union of India

and others vs. Kamlakshi Finance Corporation Ltd. , AIR 1992 SC

711, in paragraph 6 has observed as follows: 
 22 



 The High Court has, in our view, rightly criticized the
 conduct of the Assistant Collectors and the
 harassment to the assessee caused by the failure of
 these officers to give effect to the orders of authorities
 higher to them in the appellate hierarchy. It cannot
 be too vehemently emphasized that it is of utmost
 importance that, in disposing of the quasi-judicial
 issues before them, revenue officers are bound by the
 decisions of the appellate authorities. The order of the
 Appellate Collector is binding on the Assistant
 Collectors working within his jurisdiction and the
 order of the Tribunal is binding upon the Assistant
 Collectors and the Appellate Collectors who function
 under the jurisdiction of the Tribunal. The principles
 of judicial discipline require that the orders of the
 higher appellate authorities should be followed
 unreservedly by the subordinate authorities. The
 mere fact that the order of the appellate authority is
 not acceptable to the department-in itself an
 objectionable phrase and is the subject matter of an
 appeal can furnish no ground for not following it
 unless its operation has been suspended by a
 competent court. If this healthy rule is not followed,
 the result will only be undue harassment to assessee
 and chaos in administration of tax laws. 
 
 42. The Hon ble Supreme Court in the case of Sri Baradakant

Mishra (supra) held that a Subordinate Court or Tribunal/Authority

refusing to follow a High Court s decision where a petition for leave to

appeal to Supreme Court against that High Court decision was pending

would amount to deliberate disobedience and willful disregard of the High

Court and is contempt of Court. Therefore, in the case at hand the plea of

the Assessing Authority with regard to not following the decision of this

Court on the ground of pendency of SLP before the Hon ble Supreme

Court amounts to deliberate disobedience and willful disregard of this

Court. 
 23 



 43. In the case of K.N. Agarwal vs. CIT , [1991] 189 ITR 769,

while emphasizing the need of following judgments of the High Courts by

the Assessing Officer, the Allahabad High Court has observed as under: 

 Indeed, the orders of the Tribunal and the High
 Court are binding upon the Assessing Officer and
 since he acts in a quasi judicial capacity, the
 discipline of such functioning demands that he
 should follow the decision of the Tribunal or the
 High Court, as the case may be. He cannot ignore
 merely on the ground that the Tribunal s order is
 the subject matter of revision in the High Court or
 the High Court s decision is under appeal before the
 Supreme Court. Permitting him to take such a view
 would introduce judicial indiscipline, which is not
 called for even in such cases. It would lead to a
 chaotic situation. 
 
 44. The Andhra Pradesh High Court in the case of State of A.P.

vs. CTO, (1988) 169 ITR 564, held as under:
 
 ...if any authority or the Tribunal refuses to follow
 any decision of the High Court on the above
 grounds, it would be clearly guilty of committing
 contempt of the High Court and is liable to be
 proceeded against. 
 
 45. Needless to say that if the Tribunal and authorities

functioning within the territorial jurisdiction of the High Court would not

follow the order of the High Court that will lead to chaos. Everybody

would be then seeking interpreting the law according to their own whims

and fancies. In such situation, lawyers may confuse not knowing how to

advise their clients. The general public would be in dilemma as to what is

the correct position of law. As a result, the judiciary would lose its

credibility.
 24 



 46. It may be noted that it is not the case of the Assessing

Authority that the decision of this court in Bhusan Power and Steel Ltd. 

(supra) has been stayed or varied by the Hon ble Supreme Court.

Therefore, the Assessing Authority cannot refuse to follow the judgment

of the High Court on the ground that a challenge has been made to the

judgment of this Court in the Hon ble Supreme Court and the same is

pending. Hence, the Assessing Authority is clearly guilty and committed

contempt of this Court and is liable to be proceeded against. 

 The Registry of this Court is directed to separately initiate a

contempt proceeding against Mr. A.C. Nayak, Joint Commissioner of

Sales Tax, Sambalpur Range, Sambalpur by name, who has passed the

assessment order dated 03.05.2014 under Section 9C of the OET Act for

the period 01.04.2011 to 31.03.2013.
 
 47. We are afraid to notice that even though the petitioner has

filed a written submission in course of the assessment proceeding as

evident from the impugned assessment order relying on various statutory

provisions, the Supreme Court judgments, judgments of the High Court

in support of its contention, the Assessing Authority without dealing with

the contention of the petitioner with reference to the judgments relied

upon by it passed the assessment order raising huge tax and penalty

amounting to Rs.7,22,44,608/-. Thus, the impugned order shows

complete non-application of mind which ultimately amounts to judicial

indiscipline and impropriety. The Assessing Authority, who is Joint

Commissioner of Sales Tax, Sambalpur Range, Sambalpur, being a fairly
 25 



senior officer is always expected to take note of various decisions of the

Hon ble Supreme Court/High Court placed before him by the assessee

before passing any order. It may not be appropriate to say that

competent and efficient Assessing Authorities are to be posted because

the fate of litigants is dependent upon their proper adjudication.

 48. Question No.(iv) is whether the petitioner is entitled to avail

concessional rate of entry tax on coal in terms of Rule 3(4) of the OET

Rules.
 
 49. In view of our answer to question Nos.(i), (ii) and (iii) in

favour of the petitioner, we are of the considered opinion that the

petitioner is entitled to avail concessional rate of entry tax on coal in

terms of Rule 3(4) of the OET Rules.
 
 50. Accordingly, the impugned order of assessment dated

03.05.2014 (Annexure-6 series) passed by the Assessing Authority is

quashed.
 
 51. In the result, the writ petition is allowed, but without any

order as to costs.
 
 
 ................................
 B.N. Mahapatra, J.
 
 I. Mahanty, J. I agree.

 ..........................
 I.Mahanty, J.



Orissa High Court, Cuttack
Dated 30th March, 2015/ss/skj/bks