M/S. Jindal Resources Pvt. Ltd vs Executive Engineer (Elect.) on 21 August, 2018 

 Equivalent citations: AIR 2018 ORISSA 176, (2018) 190 ALLINDCAS 524 (ORI), AIRONLINE 2018 ORI 289 

 Author: S.N. Prasad 

 Bench: Sujit Narayan Prasad 

 HIGH COURT OF ORISSA: CUTTACK.

 W.P.(C) No.668 of 2011
 In the matter of an application under Article 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India.
 ---------

 M/s. Jindal Resources Pvt. Ltd. ...... Petitioner

 - Versus-Executive Engineer (Elect.),
 Western Electricity Supply Camp of Orissa Ltd.,
 Rajgangpur Electrical Division,
 P.O.-Rajgangpur, District-Sundargarh ...... Opposite Party

 For Petitioner : M/s. Biplab Mohanty, A. Patnaik, S. Patnaik 
 M.S. Rizvi.
 M/s. D.R. Bhokta, R.K. Panigrahi, H.K. Behera 
 N. Afreen.

 For Opp. Party : M/s. M. Kanungo, Y.S.P. Babu, S.N. Das 
 S.K. Mishra.

 ---------
 PRESENT:

 THE HONOURABLE SHRI JUSTICE SUJIT NARAYAN PRASAD
 --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Date of hearing : 09.08.2018 :: Date of judgment : 21.08.2018
 --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
S. N. Prasad, J. In this writ petition, the following prayers have been made:-

 (i) quashing the Inventory Report under Annexure-2;
 (ii) further a direction may kindly be issued to the
 opposite party for connection of power supply to
 the petitioner s premises within a stipulated
 period; and
 (iii) to pass such other order/orders or to issue such
 other writ/writs, as would afford complete relief to
 the petitioner.

2. The brief fact of the case is that the petitioner-Unit has obtained

electricity connection by virtue of an agreement entered into with opposite

party-WESCO on 12.06.2009 for supply of electrical energy to the premises of

the consumer situated at IDC, Kalunga, P.S.-Brahmanitarang over Plot No.284,

Khata No.27 in the district of Sundargarh for the purpose of manufacturing of

Pencil Ingot.

 On 24.12.2010, the authorities of opposite party-WESCO has

inspected the premises of the petitioner s Unit and found that the T.C. Inner

and other seals fixed on the meter was tampered with and also found that meter

was running slow by 28.47%, accordingly, they disconnected the power supply

of petitioner s premises on 24.12.2010.

 The opposite party-WESCO has prepared Inventory Report to that

effect and found therein that the consumer has dishonestly tampered the meter

so as to interfere with accurate or proper registration in a manner whereby

electricity is stolen, damage the electric meter so as to interfere with proper

accurate metering of electricity, have used electricity through a tempered meter

and has maliciously injured the meter to prevent from daily registration of

actual consumption. These attract Clauses-135(1) and 138(1) of Electricity Act,

2003 (hereinafter referred to as the Act, 2003 ).

 Subsequently, the provisional assessment has been made in

exercise of power conferred under Section 126(1) of the Act, 2003. In terms of

the provision of Section-126(3) of the Act, 2003, the petitioner has given its

objection. Thereafter, the final order of assessment was passed in exercise of

power conferred under Section-126 of the Act, 2003. However, no appeal was

preferred under the provisions of Section-127 of the Act, 2003.

 The case of the petitioner is that a criminal case was also instituted

against the petitioner-Unit for the commission of offence under Section-135 of

the Act, 2003, in which, he has been acquitted by the competent court of

criminal jurisdiction. Hence, the provisional or final assessment as has been

made under the provision of Section-126 of the Act, 2003 will of no meaning, as

such, the entire proceeding initiated under the provision of Section-126 of the

Act, 2003 may be quashed.

3. Per contra, the case of the opposite party, as per the stand taken in

the counter affidavit, is that the criminal proceeding initiated for the

commission of offence under Section-135 of the Act, 2003 will have no bearing

upon the proceeding initiated under Section-126 of the Act, 2003, since the

provision as contained under Section-126 of the Act which stipulates regarding

unauthorized use of electricity while Section-135 of the Act, 2003 deals with the

criminal part and even if the consumer is being acquitted in the criminal case,

he cannot be exonerated from the provision of Section-126 of the Act, 2003.

4. This Court has heard the learned counsel for the petitioner as well

as leaned counsel for the opposite party.

 Learned counsel for the petitioner, in support of writ petition, has

raised the following submissions:-

 (i) There being an allegation of theft of electricity

 against the petitioner and an F.I.R. having been

 lodged under Section 135 of the Act, 2003, in

 which, the petitioner has been acquitted. Hence,

 there is no question of civil liability which is

 to be assessed under the provision of Section-126 of the Act, 2003. As such, the entire

 proceeding pending under Section-126 of the Act,

 2003 is not sustainable in the eye of law; and

 (ii) The provision of Section-126 of the Act, 2003 is

 not applicable in the cases of theft of electricity

 under the provisions of Section-135 of the Act,

 2003.

 He has placed reliance upon the judgment rendered by Hon ble the

Apex Court in the case of Executive Engineer, Southern Electricity Supply

Company of Orissa Limited (SOUTHCO) and Another -Vrs.- Sri Seetaram

Rice Mill, reported in (2012) 2 SCC 108.

 Mr. Y.S.P. Babu, learned counsel appearing for the opposite party

has taken the ground that provisions of Sections-126 and 135 are altogether

different, consequence is also different and even if the petitioner has been

acquitted from the case of theft of electricity, it does not mean that the

proceeding pending under Section-126 of the Act, 2003 will be held to be

redundant.

 The petitioner ought to have filed an appeal as provided under the

provision of Section-127 of the Act, 2003 but since he has not preferred any

appeal which suggests that the provisional assessment as also the final

assessment done under Section-126 of the Act, 2003 has attained its finality

and as such, the petitioner cannot be escaped from its liability.

5. This Court has considered the submission of the learned counsel

for the parties and perused the record. From the submission made by the

learned counsel parties and pleading on record, the following issues are arises

for consideration in this writ petition:-

 (i) Whether in the case where theft of electricity alleges,

 Section-135 of the Act, 2003 in which the petitioner has

 been acquitted, an assessment under Section-126 of the Act,

 2003 can be held to be sustainable?

 (ii) Whether assessment under Section-126 of the Act, 2003 is

 not applicable with regard to the cases of theft of electricity

 under Section-135 of the Act, 2003 and with regard to the

 cases of theft of the electricity under Section-135 of the Act,

 2003, the civil liability is to be determined only by the

 Special Court where the trial is pending?

6. Both the issues are interrelated and as such, are being taken up

together.

 Before considering the rival submissions made by the learned

counsel for the parties in support of the above two issues, it is necessary to refer

to the statutory provision in this regard.

 The Act, 2003 has been enacted to consolidate the laws relating to

generation, transmission, distribution, trading and use of electricity and for

matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.

 Part XII of the Act, 2003 bears heading Investigation and

Enforcement . Section-126 of the Act, 2003 provides for assessment which

is as follows with explanation:-

 126. Assessment - (1) If on an inspection of any place or
 premises or after inspection of the equipments, gadgets,
 machines, devices found connected or used, or after
 inspection of records maintained by any person, the
 assessing officer comes to the conclusion that such person
 is indulging in unauthorized use of electricity, he shall
 provisionally assess to the best of his judgement the
 electricity charges payable by such person or by any other
 person benefited by such use.
 (2) The order of provisional assessment shall be
 served upon the person in occupation or possession or in
 charge of the place or premises in such manner as may be
 prescribed.
 (3) The person, on whom an order has been served
 under sub- section, (2) shall be entitled to file objections, if
 any, against the provisional assessment before the
 assessing officer, who shall, after affording a reasonable
 opportunity of hearing to such person, pass a final order of
 assessment within thirty days from the date of service of
 such order of provisional assessment of the electricity
 charges payable by such person.
 (4) Any person served with the order of provisional
 assessment, may, accept such assessment and deposit the
 assessed amount with the licensee within seven days of
 service of such provisional assessment order upon him:
 (5) If the assessing officer reaches to the conclusion
 that unauthorised use of electricity has taken place, the
 assessment shall be made for the entire period during
 which such unauthorized use of electricity has taken place
 and if, however, the period during which such
 unauthorised use of electricity has taken place cannot be
 ascertained, such period shall be limited to a period of
 twelve months immediately preceding the date of
 inspection.

 (6) The assessment under this section shall be made
 at a rate equal to [twice] the tariff rates applicable for the
 relevant category of services specified in sub-section (5).
 Explanation.- For the purposes of this section,-
 (a) assessing officer means an officer of a State
 Government or Board or licensee, as the case
 may be, designated as such by the State
 Government;
 (b) unauthorised use of electricity means the
 usage of electricity -
 (i) by any artificial means; or
 (ii) by a means not authorised by the
 concerned person or authority or licensee;
 or
 (iii) through a tampered meter; or
 (iv) for the purpose other than for which the
 usage of electricity was authorised; or
 (v) for the premises or areas other than those
 for which the supply of electricity was
 authorized. 
 The definition of unauthorized use of electricity with

explanation (b) of Section-126 of the Act, 2003 is as follows:-

 (b) unauthorised use of electricity means the usage
 of electricity -
 (i) by any artificial means; or
 (ii) by a means not authorised by the concerned
 person or authority or licensee; or
 (iii) through a tampered meter; or
 (iv) for the purpose other than for which the
 usage of electricity was authorised; or
 (v) for the premises or areas other than those for
 which the supply of electricity was
 authorized. 

 Part XIV of the Act, 2003 deals with Offences and Penalties . Section-135 of the Act, 2003 provides theft of electricity which is relevant in the present

case as follows:-

 135. Theft of Electricity - (1) Whoever, dishonestly, -
 (a) taps, makes or causes to be made any connection
 with overhead, underground or under water lines or cables,
 or service wires, or service facilities of a licensee or supplier
 as the case may be; or

 (b) tampers a meter, installs or uses a tampered
meter, current reversing transformer, loop connection or
any other device or method which interferes with
accurate or proper registration, calibration or
metering of electric current or otherwise results in a manner
whereby electricity is stolen or wasted; or
 (c) damages or destroys an electric meter,
apparatus, equipment, or wire or causes or allows any of
them to be so damaged or destroyed as to interfere with
the proper or accurate metering of electricity; or
 (d) uses electricity through a tampered meter; or
 (e) uses electricity for the purpose other than for
which the usage of electricity was authorised,
so as to abstract or consume or use electricity shall be
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend
to three years or with fine or with both:
 Provided that in a case where the load abstracted,
consumed, or used or attempted abstraction or attempted
consumption or attempted use -
 (i) does not exceed 10 kilowatt, the fine imposed on
first conviction shall not be less than three times the
financial gain on account of such theft of electricity and in
the event of second or subsequent conviction the fine
imposed shall not be less than six times the financial gain
on account of such theft of electricity;
 (ii) exceeds 10 kilowatt, the fine imposed on first
conviction shall not be less than three times the financial
gain on account of such theft of electricity and in the event
of second or subsequent conviction, the sentence shall be
imprisonment for a term not less than six months, but
which may extend to five years and with fine not less than
six times the financial gain on account of such theft of
electricity:
 Provided further that in the event of second and
subsequent conviction of a person where the load
abstracted, consumed, or used or attempted abstraction or
attempted consumption or attempted use exceeds 10
kilowatt, such person shall also be debarred from getting
any supply of electricity for a period which shall not be less
than three months but may extend to two years and shall
also be debarred from getting supply of electricity for that
period from any other source or generating station:
 Provided also that if it is proved that any artificial
means or means not authorized by the Board or licensee or
supplier, as the case may be, exist for the abstraction,
consumption or use of electricity by the consumer, it shall
be presumed, until the contrary is proved, that any

abstraction, consumption or use of electricity has been
dishonestly caused by such consumer.
 (1A) Without prejudice to the provisions of this
Act, the licensee or supplier, as the case may be, may,
upon detection of such theft of electricity, immediately
disconnect the supply of electricity:
 Provided that only such officer of the licensee or
supplier, as authorized for the purpose by the Appropriate
Commission or any other officer of the licensee or supplier,
as the case may be, of the rank higher than the rank so
authorised shall disconnect the supply line of electricity:
 Provided further that such officer of the licensee or
supplier, as the case may be, shall lodge a complaint in
writing relating to the commission of such offence in police
station having jurisdiction within twenty-four hours from
the time of such disconnection:
 Provided also that the licensee or supplier, as the
case may be, on deposit or payment of the assessed
amount or electricity charges in accordance with the
provisions of this Act, shall, without prejudice to the
obligation to lodge the complaint as referred to in the
second proviso to this clause, restore the supply line of
electricity within forty-eight hours of such deposit or
payment.
(2) Any officer of the licensee or supplier as the case
may be, authorized in this behalf by the State Government
may -
 (a) enter, inspect, break open and search any place
 or premises in which he has reason to believe
 that electricity has been or is being, used
 unauthorisedly;
 (b) search, seize and remove all such devices,
 instruments, wires and any other facilitator or
 article which has been, or is being used for
 unauthorized use of electricity;
 (c) examine or seize any books of account or
 documents which in his opinion shall be useful
 for or relevant to, any proceedings in respect of
 the offence under sub-section (1) and allow the
 person from whose custody such books of
 account or documents are seized to make copies
 thereof or take extracts therefrom in his
 presence.
(3) The occupant of the place of search or any person on
his behalf shall remain present during the search and a list
of all things seized in the course of such search shall be
prepared and delivered to such occupant or person who
shall sign the list:

 Provided that no inspection, search and seizure of
 any domestic places or domestic premises shall be carried
 out between sunset and sunrise except in the
 presence of an adult male member occupying such
 premises.
 (4) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure , 1973,
 relating to search and seizure shall apply, as far as may
 be, to searches and seizure under this Act. 

 Learned counsel for the petitioner, while elaborating the

submission, has contended that since it is the Special Court which is to

determine the civil liability against the consumer as provided under Section-154(5) of the Act, 2003, the assessment under Section-126 of the Act, cannot

be made.

 He has submitted that Section-126 of the Act, 2003 shall not

apply in the cases where there is allegation of theft of electricity.

 He has further submitted that assessment be made under

 Section-126 of the Act, 2003 in the cases for theft of electricity also there

was no occasion for empowering the Special Court to determine the civil law.

 He has further submitted that in the present case since F.I.R.

under Section-125 of the Act, 2003 has been registered and an allegation of

theft of electricity has been made, in which, he has been acquitted and as

such, the entire proceeding pending under the provision of Section-126 of

the Act, 2003 will be held to be unsustainable.

 He, referring to the provision of the Act, 2003 especially the

explanation (b) of Section-126 of the aforesaid Act, has submitted that

 unauthorised use of electricity means the usage of electricity (i) by any

artificial means; or (ii) by a means not authorised by the concerned person

or authority or licensee; or (iii) through a tampered meter; or for the

purpose other than for which the usage of electricity was authorised; or for

the premises or areas other than those for which the supply of electricity was

authorized.

 His further argument is that Section-135 of the Act, 2003 since

is coming under Part XIV under the heading Offences and Penalties which

deals with the theft of electricity (1) whoever, dishonestly,- (a) taps, makes or

causes to be made any connection with overhead, underground or under

water lines or cables, or service wires, or service facilities of a licensee or

supplier as the case may be; or (b) tampers a meter, installs or uses a

tampered meter, current reversing transformer, loop connection or any other

device or method which interferes with accurate or proper registration,

calibration or metering of electric current or otherwise results in a manner

whereby electricity is stolen or wasted; or (c) damages or destroys an electric

meter, apparatus, equipment, or wire or causes or allows any of them to be

so damaged or destroyed as to interfere with the proper or accurate metering

of electricity, (d) uses electricity through a tampered meter; or (e) uses

electricity for the purpose other than for which the usage of electricity was

authorised,

 It is evident from the bare reading of the meaning of theft as per

the provision of Section-135 of the Act, 2003 and the unauthorized use of

electricity as provided under sub-section(b) of Section-126 of the aforesaid

Act that use of electricity is generous in which instances Section-135(1) of

the Act, 2003 are specifies the theft of electricity is unauthorized

use of electricity done dishonestly. Hence, the assessment under

 Section-126 of the Act, 2003 has to follow whenever unauthorized use of

electricity is made by a person as well as a consumer. The said unauthorized

use of electricity becomes with coupled with dishonest intention which

invites imprisonment.

 Section-126 of the Act, 2003 does not indicate that the

assessment shall not be made, if the unauthorized use of electricity becomes

a theft.

 Section-135 of the Act, 2003 also does not give any indication

that assessment under Section-126 of the Act, 2003 is not to be undertaken,

if there is theft of electricity. The sixth proviso to Section-135 of the Act,

2003 is as follows:-

 Provided also that the licensee or supplier, as the case
 may be, on deposit or payment of the assessed amount or
 electricity charges in accordance with the provisions of this
 Act, shall, without prejudice to the obligation to lodge the
 complaint as referred to in the second proviso to this
 clause, restore the supply line of electricity within forty-eight hours of such deposit or payment. 

 The sixth proviso to Section-135 of the Act, 2003 uses the words

 assessed amount which is nothing but an amount as contemplated by

 Section-126 of the Act, 2003.

 Learned counsel for the petitioner, to support his submission,

has referred to sub-sections(5) and (6) of Section-154 of the Act, 2003.

 He submits that the said provision empowers the civil court to

determine the civil liability against the consumer or a person.

Hence, it is only there is Special Court which has jurisdiction to determine

the civil liability. Hence, in theft cases, an assessment under Section-126 of

the Act, 2003 is not contemplated since for determining the civil liability in

two forums shall not be created. For ready reference, sub-sections(5) and (6)

of Section-154 of the Act, 2003 is reproduced herein below:-

 (5) The Special Court shall determine the civil liability
 against a consumer or a person in terms of money for theft
 of energy which shall not be less than an amount
 equivalent to two times of the tariff rate applicable for a
 period of twelve months preceding the date of detection of
 theft of energy or the exact period of theft if determined
 whichever is less and the amount of civil liability so
 determined shall be recovered as if it were a decree of Civil
 Court.
 (6) In case the civil liability so determined finally by the
 Special Court is less than the amount deposited by the
 consumer or the person, the excess amount so deposited by
 the consumer or the person, to the Board or licensee or the
 concerned person, as the case may be, shall be refunded
 by the Board or licensee or the concerned person, as the
 case may be, within a fortnight from the date of
 communication of the order of the Special Court together
 with interest at the prevailing Reserve Bank of India prime
 lending rate for the period from the date of such deposit till
 the date of payment. 

 Civil liability is defined in explanation to Section-154 of the Act,

2003 which is to be the following effect:-

 Explanation. - For the purposes of this section, civil
 liability means loss or damage incurred by the Board or
 licensee or the concerned person, as the case may be, due
 to the commission of an offence referred to in sections 135 
 to 140 and Section 150 . 

 Sub-section(6) of Section-154 of the Act, 2003 provides that in

case the civil liability so determined finally by the Special Court is less

than the amount deposited by the consumer or the person, the excess

amount so deposited by the consumer or the person, to the Board or licensee

or the concerned person, as the case may be, shall be refunded by the Board

or licensee or the concerned person, as the case may be, within a fortnight

from the date of communication of the order of the Special Court together

with interest.

 The words deposited by the consumer or the person in sub-section(6) of Section-154 of the Act, 2003 are nothing but an amount

deposited by the consumer in accordance with Section-126 of the Act, 2003,

since there is no other provision of the Act, 2003 for deposit of the amount

by a consumer or the person relating to theft of electricity.

 Thus, the submission of the learned counsel for the petitioner is

that Section-154 of the Act, 2003 indicates that it is only the Special Court

which shall determined civil liability in terms of money for theft of electricity

cannot be accepted.

7. Learned counsel for the parties have relied upon the judgment of

the Apex Court in the case of Executive Engineer, Southern Electricity Supply

Company of Orissa Limited (SOUTHCO) and Another (supra).

 In the said case, Hon ble the Apex Court has occasioned to

consider the distinction between the unauthorized use of electricity as

provided in Section-126 of the Act, 2003 and theft of electricity as provided

under Section-135 of the Act, 2003.

 In the said case, the respondent had obtained electricity supply

under an Agreement on 9.12.1997. The premises was inspected on

10.06.2009. On 25.7.2009, a provisional assessment order was issued

raising a demand. The respondent was required to file an objection.

Respondent did not file any objection but file a writ petition being W.P.(C)

No.12175 of 2009 challenging the provisional assessment order before the

High Court.

 The plea taken by the respondent that the provision of Section-126 of the Act, 2003 is not attracted the above case. The High Court held

that overdrawal of maximum demand would not follow under the scope of

 unauthorized use of electricity and the appellants have no jurisdiction to

issue provisional assessment order against the order of High Court, the

appellants have filed the appeal.

 The issues which fall for consideration by the Hon ble Apex

Court in paragraph-12 of the aforesaid judgment to the following effect:-

 12. 1. Wherever the consumer consumes electricity in
 excess of the maximum of the contracted load, would the
 provisions of Section 126 of the 2003 Act be attracted on its
 true scope and interpretation?
 2. Whether the High Court, in the facts and
 circumstances of the case, was justified in interfering with
 the provisional order of assessment/show-cause notice
 dated 25.7.2009, in exercise of its jurisdiction under Article
 226 of the Constitution of India?
 3. Was the writ petition before the High Court
 under Article 226 of the Constitution of India not

 maintainable because of a statutory alternative remedy
 being available under Section 127 of the 2003 Act? 

 In the above context, the Hon ble Apex Court has considered

the provision of Sections-126 and 135 of the Act, 2003. The Hon ble Apex

Court held that the provisions of Sections-126 and 135 of the Act, 2003

work in different fields.

 The following was laid down in paragraphs 24 to 30 of the

aforesaid judgment pointing out the distinction between the unauthorized

use of electricity and theft of electricity which are quoted herein below:-

 24. Upon their plain reading, the mark differences in the
 contents of Sections 126 and 135 of the 2003 Act are
 obvious. They are distinct and different provisions which
 operate in different fields and have no common premise in
 law. We have already noticed that Sections 126 and 127 of
 the 2003 Act read together constitute a complete code in
 themselves covering all relevant considerations for passing
 of an order of assessment in cases which do not fall
 under Section 135 of the 2003 Act.
 25. Section 135 of the 2003 Act falls under Part XIV
 relating to offences and penalties and title of the Section
 is theft of electricity . The Section opens with the words
 whoever, dishonestly does any or all of the acts specified
 under clauses (a) to (e) of Sub-section (1) of Section 135 of
 the 2003 Act so as to abstract or consume or use electricity
 shall be punishable for imprisonment for a term which may
 extend to three years or with fine or with both. Besides
 imposition of punishment as specified under these
 provisions or the proviso thereto, Sub-section (1A) of Section
 135 of the 2003 Act provides that without prejudice to the
 provisions of the 2003 Act, the licensee or supplier, as the
 case may be, through officer of rank authorized in this
 behalf by the appropriate commission, may immediately
 disconnect the supply of electricity and even take other
 measures enumerated under Sub-sections (2) to (4) of the
 said section. The fine which may be imposed under Section
 135 of the 2003 Act is directly proportional to the number of
 convictions and is also dependent on the extent of load
 abstracted.

26. In contradistinction to these provisions, Section
126 of the 2003 Act would be applicable to the cases where
there is no theft of electricity but the electricity is being
consumed in violation of the terms and conditions of
supply leading to malpractices which may squarely fall
within the expression unauthorized use of electricity . This
assessment/proceedings would commence with the
inspection of the premises by an assessing officer and
recording of a finding that such consumer is indulging in an
 authorized use of electricity . Then the assessing officer
shall provisionally assess, to the best of his judgment, the
electricity charges payable by such consumer, as well as
pass a provisional assessment order in terms of Section
126(2) of the 2003 Act.
27. The officer is also under obligation to serve a notice
in terms of Section 126(3) of the 2003 Act upon any such
consumer requiring him to file his objections, if any, against
the provisional assessment before a final order of
assessment is passed within thirty days from the date of
service of such order of provisional assessment. Thereafter,
any person served with the order of provisional
assessment may accept such assessment and deposit the
amount with the licensee within seven days of service of
such provisional assessment order upon him or prefer an
appeal against the resultant final order under Section
127 of the 2003 Act. The order of assessment
under Section 126 and the period for which such order
would be passed has to be in terms of Sub-sections (5) and
(6) of Section 126 of the 2003 Act. The Explanation
to Section 126 is of some significance, which we shall deal
with shortly hereinafter. Section 126 of the 2003 Act falls
under Chapter XII and relates to investigation and
enforcement and empowers the assessing officer to pass
an order of assessment.
28. Section 135 of the 2003 Act deals with an offence of
theft of electricity and the penalty that can be imposed for
such theft. This squarely falls within the dimensions of
criminal jurisprudence and mens rea is one of the relevant
factors for finding a case of theft. On the contrary, Section
126 of the 2003 Act does not speak of any
criminal intendment and is primarily an action and remedy
available under the civil law. It does not have features or
elements which are traceable to the criminal concept of
mens rea.
29. Thus, it would be clear that the expression
 unauthorized use of electricity under Section 126 of the
2003 Act deals with cases of unauthorized use, even in
absence of intention. These cases would certainly be
different from cases where there is dishonest abstraction of

 electricity by any of the methods enlisted under Section
 135 of the 2003 Act. A clear example would be, where a
 consumer has used excessive load as against the
 installed load simpliciter and there is violation of the
 terms and conditions of supply, then, the case would fall
 under Section 126 of the 2003 Act. On the other hand,
 where a consumer, by any of the means and methods as
 specified under Sections 135(a) to 135(e) of the 2003 Act,
 has abstracted energy with dishonest intention and
 without authorization, like providing for a direct connection
 bypassing the installed meter, the case would fall under
 Section 135 of the Act.
 30. Therefore, there is a clear distinction between the
 cases that would fall under Section 126 of the 2003 Act on
 the one hand and Section 135 of the 2003 Act on the other.
 There is no commonality between them in law. They
 operate in different and distinct fields. The assessing
 officer has been vested with the powers to pass provisional
 and final order of assessment in cases of unauthorized use
 of electricity and cases of consumption of electricity beyond
 contracted load will squarely fall under such power. The
 legislative intention is to cover the cases of malpractices
 and unauthorized use of electricity and then theft which is
 governed by the provisions of Section 135 of the 2003 Act. 

 In paragraph-29 of the aforesaid judgment, it would be clear

that the expression unauthorized use of electricity under Section-126 of

the 2003 Act deals with cases of unauthorized use, even in the absence of

intention. The words even in absence of intention does mean that if

there is any intention to steal the electricity, admittedly it will come under

the fold of Section-135 of the Act, 2003 but even when there is absence of

intention, it will be treated as unauthorized use of electricity so that the

same will come under the fold of Section-126 of the Act, 2003, meaning

thereby, the word which is to be taken into consideration is of unauthorized

use of electricity and if there is an intention to steal the electricity along with

the provision of Section-126 of the Act, 2003 to make a provisional/final

assessment, a case is also to be registered under the provision of Section-135 of the Act for inflicting punishment as per the aforesaid provision.

Simultaneously, for recovering the revenue due to the unauthorized use of

electricity by initiating a proceeding under the provision of Section-126 of

the Act, 2003.

 In paragraph-49 of the aforesaid judgment, the Hon ble Apex

Court further held that the provisions of Section-126 of the 2003 Act are

intended to cover the cases over and above the cases which would be

specifically covered under the provisions of Section-135 of the 2003 Act. The

said paragraph is quoted herein below:-

 49. Once the court decides that it has to take a purposive
 construction as opposed to textual construction, then the
 legislative purpose sought to be achieved by such an
 interpretation has to be kept in mind. We have already
 indicated that keeping in view the legislative scheme and
 the provisions of the 2003 Act, it will be appropriate to
 adopt the approach of purposive construction on the facts of
 this case. We have also indicated above that the provisions
 of Section 126 of the 2003 Act are intended to cover the
 cases over and above the cases which would be
 specifically covered under the provisions of Section 135 of
 the 2003 Act. 

 The Apex Court has observed in the said judgment that the

expression of explanation under Section-126 of the Act, 2003 is to be given

wider amplified manner. Conclusions have been recorded in the

paragraph-87 which is quoted herein below:

 87. Having dealt with and answered determinatively the
 questions framed in the judgment, we consider it necessary
 to precisely record the conclusions of our judgment which
 are as follows:-

 1. Wherever the consumer commits the breach of the terms
 of the Agreement, Regulations and the provisions of the Act
 by consuming electricity in excess of the sanctioned and
 connected load, such consumer would be in blame and
 under liability within the ambit and scope of Section
 126 of the 2003 Act.
 2. The expression unauthorized use of electricity means 
 as appearing in Section 126 of the 2003 Act is an
 expression of wider connotation and has to be construed
 purposively in contrast to contextual interpretation while
 keeping in mind the object and purpose of the Act. The
 cases of excess load consumption than the connected load
 inter alia would fall under Explanation (b)(iv) to Section
 126 of the 2003 Act, besides it being in violation of
 Regulations 82 and 106 of the Regulations and terms of the
 Agreement.
 3. In view of the language of Section 127 of the 2003 Act,
 only a final order of assessment passed under Section
 126(3) is an order appealable under Section 127 and a
 notice-cum-provisional assessment made under Section
 126(2) is not appealable.
 4. Thus, the High Court should normally decline to interfere
 in a final order of assessment passed by the assessing
 officer in terms of Section 126(3) of the 2003 Act in exercise
 of its jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of
 India.
 5. The High Court did not commit any error of jurisdiction in
 entertaining the writ petition against the order raising a
 jurisdictional challenge to the notice/provisional
 assessment order dated 25.7.2009. However, the High
 Court transgressed its jurisdictional limitations while
 travelling into the exclusive domain of the assessing officer
 relating to passing of an order of assessment and
 determining the factual controversy of the case.
 6. The High Court having dealt with the jurisdictional issue,
 the appropriate course of action would have been to
 remand the matter to the assessing authority by directing
 the consumer to file his objections, if any, as contemplated
 under Section 126(3) and require the authority to pass a
 final order of assessment as contemplated under Section
 126(5) of the 2003 Act in accordance with law.

 From the issues which falls for consideration by the Hon ble

Apex Court in paragraph-12 and conclusions have been recorded in

paragraph-87 of the aforesaid judgment, it does not indicate that the Hon ble

Apex Court has considered the issues that assessment is not to be made

under Section-126 of the Act, 2003 in the cases falling under Section-135 of the Act, 2003 nor any such ratio laid down by the Hon ble Apex Court

in the aforesaid judgment.

 From the facts of the case as noted above, the writ petition has

been filed in the High Court challenging the assessment notice. The main

issue for consideration before the High Court was that wherever the

consumer consumes electricity in excess of consumption of the contracted

load, would the provision of Section-126 of the Act, 2003 be attracted.

 In the said judgment, no such ratio has been laid down which

may support the petitioner s case that in the cases of theft of electricity

under Section-135 of the Act, 2003, no assessment can be undertaken

under Section-126 of the Act, 2003.

 Provision of Section-135 of the Act, 2003 has to be interpreted in

the manner so as to give effect to the object or the purpose of the Act, 2003.

 Interpretation of both the provisions has to be made in

harmonious manner to advance the object and to make both the provisions

to approve and effective.

 Here it is relevant to refer the judgment rendered by

Constitution Bench of Hon ble the Apex Court in the case of Tinsukhia

Electricity Supply Co. Ltd. -Vrs.- State of Assam and Others, reported

in (1989) 3 SCC 709 where it has been laid down that the provision of a

statute must be so construed as to make it effective and operative.

 Paragarphs-118 and 120 of the said judgment are quoted herein

below:-

 118. The courts strongly lean against any construction
 which tends to reduce a statute to futility. The provision of
 a statute must be so construed as to make it effective and
 operative, on the principle ut res magis valeat quam
 pereat . It is, no doubt, true that if a statute is absolutely
 vague and its language wholly intractable and absolutely
 meaningless, the statute could be declared void for
 vagueness. This is not in judicial review by testing the law
 for arbitrariness or unreasonableness under Article 14; but
 what a court of construction, dealing with the language of a
 statute, does in order to ascertain from, and accord to, the
 statute the meaning and purpose which the legislature
 intended for it. 
 Unless the words were so absolutely senseless that
 I could do nothing at all with them, I should be bound to
 find some meaning and not to declare them void for
 uncertainty. 
 120. It is, therefore, the court s duty to make what it can
 of the statute, knowing that the statutes are meant to be
 operative and not inept and the nothing short of
 impossibility should allow a court to declare a statute
 unworkable. 

8. The fact of the case in hand is that the F.I.R. has been instituted

which culminated into acquittal by the judgment rendered by the competent

court as per the statute.

 The submission advanced by the learned counsel for the

petitioner that since the petitioner has been acquitted in the criminal case

and as such, there is no liability upon him to make any payment as per the

assessment made under the provisions of Section-126 of the Act, 2003.

 As has been stated hereinabove that the proceeding to be

initiated under Sections-126 and 135 of the Act, 2003, but both are in

different fields having no bearing to each other.

9. In view of such legal position, now it is to be examined by this

Court whether after acquittal in the criminal case, the petitioner can be

given any benefit in a proceeding initiated under the provision of Section-126 

of the Act, 2003?

 It is evident from the judgment as has been annexed by the

petitioner by way of rejoinder affidavit that the trial court has taken into

consideration the deposition of P.W.1 given in paragraph-5 to the effect that

the meter situated outside the factory is accessible to the public and it can

be tampered by anybody desiring to do so. The statement of P.W.12 has also

been taken note as has been recorded in paragraph-4 of the deposition that

audio meter situating outside is guarded by a WESCO employee and they

had not received any report regarding any tampering from him.

 Further it has been revealed from the evident of P.Ws.10 and 12

that a dump report was prepared by WESCO every month which discloses

actual reading of audit meter and main meter but the dump copy had not

been handed over to police during investigation which would have clarified

the actual energy consumption, and if the meters would have been

tampered, then there would certainly have been discrepant readings of audit

meter and dump copy reading.

 Further it has been taken note of the seized article marked as

Ext.2 which was seized on 5.6.2011 that was after about six months of

lodging of the F.I.R. but without any explanation by the I.O. and thereby

acquitted the petitioner from the criminal case.

 This Court is of the view after going across the aforesaid

judgment that the same is not clean acquittal rather on technicality, the

benefit of doubt has been given and thereby the petitioner has been

acquitted.

 However, this Court is not making any comment upon the

legality and propriety of the judgment, since that is not the issue before this

Court.

 This Court, after reiterating the legal settled position as has

been discussed in the preceding paragraphs, is of the view that since

proceeding is initiated under the provision of Section-135 of the Act, 2003

will have no bearing upon the proceeding initiated under Section-126 of the

Act, 2003 that will also applicable even in case of acquittal in the criminal

case for offence committed under Section-135 of the Act, 2003.

 One further point is to be referred herein that the petitioner has

not chosen to file appeal under the provisions of Section-127 of the Act,

2003 against the final assessment order made by the authority under the

provision of Section-126 of the Act, 2003 and as such, the final assessment

has attained its finality. Hence, the petitioner s Unit is liable to make

payment of the amount as has been assessed finally by the authority under

the provision of Section-126 of the Act, 2003.

 It is also relevant to refer herein a Letter No.42/2/2005-R R

dated 12th November, 2007 issued by the Director (R R), Government of

India, Ministry of Power to the Principal Secretary/Secretary (Energy) of all

the States and the Secretaries to all SERCs referring the subject therein

applicability of provisions of Section 126 and 135 of the Electricity Act,

2003 whereby and whereunder the decision taken by the Ministry of Power,

Government of India that the assessment made under Section 126 of the

Act, 2003 of the charges for unauthorized use of electricity would be

applicable to those cases where action is taken for offences under Section

135 and the situation of alleged commitment of offence is covered under the

provisions of Section-126 . For ready reference, the content of the said letter

is being quoted herein below:-

 No.42/2/2005-R R
 Government of India
 Ministry of Power

 Shram Shakti Bhawan,
 Rafi Marg,
 New Delhi
 The 12th November, 2007.
 To
 The Principal Secretary/Secretary (Energy) of all the States.
 The Secretary of all SERCs.
 Sub: Applicability of Provisions of Section 126 and 135 of the
 Electricity Act, 2003.
 Sir,
 Subsequent to the enactment to the Electricity (Amendment)
 Act, 2007 references have been received from the M.P. Electricity
 Regulatory Commission and the U.P. Electricity Regulatory
 Commission seeking clarification regarding applicability of the
 provisions of Section 126 and 135 of the Electricity Act. The matter
 has been examined in consultation with the Deptt. of Legal Affairs
 and accordingly following is clarified :
 (i) Key difference between the two provisions of Sections 126 
 and 135 is that dishonest intention as mentioned u/s. 135 is the
 necessary ingredient for the offence of theft of electricity.
 (ii) For prosecuting someone u/s. 135 a complaint or a report by
 police to the Court is necessary u/s. 151 .
 (iii) Section 126 is for assessment of the charges for
 unauthorised use of electricity. This provision would also be
 applicable to those cases where action is taken for offences under
 Section 135 and the situation of alleged commitment of offence is
 covered under the provisions of Section 126 .
 Yours faithfully,
 Sd/-
 (Alok Kumar)
 Director (R R) 

10. In view of the discussion made in detail hereinabove, both the

issues are answered.

 Accordingly the writ petition fails and it is dismissed.

 ........................
 S.N. Prasad, J.
 

 Orissa High Court, Cuttack,
Dated the 21st August, 2018/D. Aech
