B.S.E.S. Rajdhani Power Ltd. vs Jagat Ram Anr. on 10 December, 2014 

 Author: S. Muralidhar 

 Bench: S. Muralidhar 

 IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

 CRL.A. 1051 of 2008

 B.S.E.S. RAJDHANI POWER LTD. ..... Appellant
 Through: Mr. Sunil Fernandes, Standing
 Counsel with Mr. Deepak
 Pathak, Advocate.

 versus

 JAGAT RAM ANR. ..... Respondents
 Through: Mr. Aditya Sharma proxy for
 Mr. S. Satyanarayana, Advocate.

 WITH

 CRL.A. 1052 of 2008

 B.S.E.S. RAJDHANI POWER LTD. ..... Appellant
 Through: Mr. Sunil Fernandes, Standing
 Counsel with Mr. Deepak
 Pathak, Advocate

 versus

 R.K. GUPTA ANR. ..... Respondents
 Through: Mr. Vijay Gupta, Advocate

 WITH

 CRL.A. 1053 of 2008

 B.S.E.S. RAJDHANI POWER LTD. ..... Appellant
 Through: Mr. Sunil Fernandes, Standing
 Counsel with Mr. Deepak
 Pathak, Advocate

 versus

 P.P. SINGH ANR. ..... Respondents
 Through: None.

 WITH

Crl. A. Nos.1051 to 1056 of 2008 CRL.A. 1054 of 2008

 B.S.E.S. RAJDHANI POWER LTD. ..... Appellant
 Through: Mr. Sunil Fernandes, standing
 counsel with Mr. Deepak Pathak,
 Advocate.

 versus

 RAJIV BHASIN ANR. ..... Respondents
 Through: Mr. Mukul Dhawan, Advocate

 WITH

 CRL.A. 1055 of 2008

 B.S.E.S. RAJDHANI POWER LTD. ..... Appellant
 Through: Mr. Sunil Fernandes, Standing
 Counsel with Mr. Deepak
 Pathak, Advocate.

 versus

 HASIBUDDIN ANR. ..... Respondents
 Through: None.

 WITH

 CRL.A. 1056 of 2008

 B.S.E.S. RAJDHANI POWER LTD. ..... Appellant
 Through: Mr. Sunil Fernandes, Standing
 Counsel with Mr. Deepak
 Pathak, Advocate
 versus

 GROVER RESTAURANT CATERERS ......Respondents
 Through: None.

 CORAM: JUSTICE S. MURALIDHAR

 ORDER
 10.12.2014

 Crl. A. Nos.1051 to 1056 of 2008 The issue for consideration
 1. These appeals raise an interesting but substantial question of law
regarding the powers and jurisdiction of special electricity courts in
the context of compounding of offence of theft of electricity under
 Section 152 of the Electricity Act, 2003 („Act‟). The question raised by
the Appellant, B.S.E.S. Rajdhani Power Limited („BRPL‟) in all these
cases is that, whether, notwithstanding the compounding of the criminal
liability of a consumer under Section 152 of the Act, the special court
can nevertheless proceed to determine the civil liability in exercise of
its powers under Section 154(5) of the Act? Resultantly, it is sought to
be urged that the consequences of compounding in terms of Section
152(3) of the Act, i.e., a deemed „acquittal‟ within the meaning of
 Section 300 of the Criminal Procedure Code, 1973 („Cr PC‟) will not
extinguish the civil liability of such consumer which can be proceeded
to be determined by the special court under Section 154(5) of the Act.
 
 Background facts
 2. The facts in all these appeals are more or less similar and, therefore,
illustratively the Court refers to the facts in Crl. A. No.1051 of 2008
(B.S.E.S. Rajdhani Power Ltd. v. Jagat Ram Anr.). The case of
BRPL is that its inspection team undertook an inspection at house
No.375, Badarpur of Respondent No.1 on 22nd September 2005 and
found that Respondent No.1, who was the user and occupier, had
indulged in direct theft of electricity by illegally tapping the BSES LV
Mains and proceeded to raise a supplementary theft bill for a sum of
Rs. 6,94,412. When that bill was not paid, BRPL filed a criminal
complaint No. 244 of 2006 in the Special Electricity Court, Patiala
House Courts, New Delhi under Section 135 as well as Section 154(5) 
of the Act for determination of both the criminal and civil liability
respectively of the consumer.
 
 Crl. A. Nos.1051 to 1056 of 2008 3. Respondent No.1 was summoned by the Special Electricity Court. At
that stage, Respondent No.1 approached the Deputy Commissioner
(„DC‟), who was the authorised officer appointed by the Government of
National Capital Territory of Delhi, for compounding of the criminal
liability under Section 152 of the Act.
 

 4. It appears that in the said proceedings before the DC, BRPL
participated and raised objections to the prayer for compounding of the
offence under Section 135 of the Act. It was specifically urged that
unless the theft bills were paid by the consumer, there should be no
compounding of the offence. It was further urged that unless there is a
mutual agreement between the person proceeded against for theft and
the person from whom the theft was committed (BRPL) there cannot
be any compounding of the offence. It was urged that any other
interpretation of the Act would defeat the object and scheme of the Act.
 

 The order of the Deputy Commissioner
 5. A detailed order was passed by the DC on 31 st January 2007 in the
said application and in several other similar applications holding that
 Section 152 of the Act gives relief only from criminal liability and that
as regards civil liability it has to be separately dealt with under Section
154 (5) of the Act. The relevant portion of the said order reads as
under:
 Section 152 read with Section 154(5) makes it clear that the
 criminal liability and civil liability are two separate matters.
 Section 152 gives relief from the criminal liability subject to
 payment of compounding fee decided by the appropriate
 government or authorized officer in this behalf. Section 154(5) 
 separately deals with the civil liabilities including that of theft
 of electricity with provisions of penalty. In view of these legal
 provisions, in my considered opinion, this notified authority has
 an obligation to give the benefits of Section 152 to Petitioners
 by accepting compounding fee. The theft bill and any other
 Crl. A. Nos.1051 to 1056 of 2008 charges due to the Respondent have to be dealt separately under
 the appropriate law. Accordingly, the objections raised by the
 respondent are overruled and the Petitioners may deposit the
 compounding fee in Government Treasury, calculated on the
 basis of Section 152(1) and details given in the copy of theft
 bill raised by the respondent against the petitioners. The
 compounding fee payable by Petitioners is detailed below. 
 

 6. When the complaint case was sought to be proceeded with in the
Special Court, learned counsel for the Respondents submitted that in
view of the compounding of the offence in terms of Section 152 of the
Act, there was a deemed acquittal and, therefore, no further
proceedings could be continued against the Respondents in any
criminal court.
 

 The impugned order of the Special Court
 7. By the impugned order dated 7th November 2008, the special court
accepted the submission of the Respondents by holding that this court
being criminal court, the proceedings comes to an end after offence is
compounded by the accused before the Appropriate Government. It
was further held that the word „shall‟ used in Section 154(5) of the Act
would not be read as mandatory for the criminal court/special
court/sessions court to decide the civil liability independently if there
was a deemed acquittal under Section 152 of the Act. It was held that
the determination of the civil liability was dependent on theft of
electricity and since the theft of electricity stands compounded, no
proceedings could continue for determining the civil liability.
 

 8. Aggrieved by the above order, the present appeals have been filed by
BRPL.
 

 Crl. A. Nos.1051 to 1056 of 2008 Submissions of learned counsel for the Appellant
 9. Mr. Sunil Fernandes, learned counsel for the Appellants, submitted
that the wording of Section 152 of the Act is such that what was
intended by the legislature was to extinguish only the criminal liability
as a result of the compounding of the offence. This was evident from
the fact that the provision envisaged no further proceedings continue in
any criminal court. He submitted that the Special Court in the
impugned order erred in observing that since it was a criminal court, it
could not continue to determine the civil liability. He submitted that the
very scheme of the Act was to combine in the Special Court both the
criminal and civil jurisdictions and the mandate to determine civil
liability under Section 154 (5) of the Act was unambiguous.
 

 10. Referring to the decision of the Division Bench („DB‟) of this Court
in B.L. Kantroo v. BSES Rajdhani Power Ltd. 154(2008) DLT 56,
Mr. Fernandes submitted that the jurisdiction of the Special Court to
exclusively determine the civil liability and issues arising out of
exercise of such jurisdiction was expressly recognised by this Court.
He pointed out that in the appeals before this Court and, in particular,
Crl. A. No. 1051 of 2008, the compounding fee was restricted to the
amount envisaged under Section 152 (1) of the Act which was less than
20% of the fine amount if convicted, and definitely far less than the
civil liability. For instance, it was pointed out that in Crl. A. No. 1051
of 2008, the compounding fee determined by the DC was Rs. 1,00,000,
whereas, if it there had been conviction at the end of a criminal trial,
the fine amount would have been Rs. 20,83,236 (apart from
imprisonment) and the civil liability Rs. 6,94,412. Effectively,
therefore, by opting for compounding, the consumer had avoided the
substantial civil liability of nearly Rs. 7,00,000, imprisonment and a
fine amount of over Rs. 20,00,000. He submitted that this could never
 Crl. A. Nos.1051 to 1056 of 2008 have been the intention of the legislature when it provided for
compounding of the criminal offence under Section 152 of the Act. 
 

 11. Mr. Fernandes submitted that when this issue was argued before the
DC, the BRPL did not have the benefit of the decision of this Court in
 Radhey Shyam Bansal v. B.S.E.S. Rajdhani Power Ltd. 2008 (148)
DLT 462 where it was emphasised that there could be no compounding
of the offence without the consent of BRPL. This was also perhaps the
reason why the order of the DC was not challenged by BRPL since that
order has kept open the question of determination of civil liability and
had, in fact, expressly stated that the matter will proceed before the
Special Court for that purpose. He submitted that in the present case,
not only has the criminal liability been extinguished without the
consent of BRPL, but it has also lost out on the civil liability because of
the impugned order of the Special Court. Referring to the order passed
by this Court on 13th February 2008 in Crl. M.C. No. 482 of 2008, he
submitted that the object of the Act was to deter theft of electricity,
but at the same time, encourage settlements where the revenue aspect
stands satisfied. He urged that a distinction should be drawn between
the cases where acquittal results at the end of a full-fledged trial and
where there was a „deemed acquittal‟ as a result of acquittal under
 Section 152 of the Act for the purpose of determination of the
consequential civil liability. 
 

 Submissions of learned counsel for the Respondents
 12. In reply, it is submitted by Mr. Vijay Gupta, learned counsel
appearing for the Respondents in Crl. A. No. 1052 of 2008 and
Mr. Mukul Dhawan, learned counsel appearing for the Respondents in
Crl. A. No. 1054 of 2008 that the determination of the civil liability
under Section 154(5) of the Act was intrinsically linked with the
 Crl. A. Nos.1051 to 1056 of 2008 determination of the criminal liability. Attention of the Court was
drawn to Explanation to Section 154(5) of the Act which defines civil
liability to be the loss or damage incurred due to the commission of an
offence referred to in Section 135 to 140 and Section 150 of the Act. It
was argued that if there was no commission of an offence in the first
place, as a result of the deemed acquittal under Section 152(3) of the
Act, then the question of further determining the civil liability did not
arise.
 

 13. It was submitted that while the question of the Special Court having
exclusive jurisdiction to determine the civil liability, as explained in
 B.L. Kantroo v. BSES Rajdhani Power Ltd. , was not in issue, as far as
BRPL was concerned, it could not seek to enforce civil liability through
the Special Court if the criminal liability of a consumer stood
extinguished. It was submitted that there could not be any distinction
between acquittal at the end of a full-fledged trial and acquittal as a
result of the compounding under Section 152 of the Act. In either case,
the further civil liability would also stand extinguished. 
 
 Decision of the Court
 14. Among the changes brought out by the Act, which came into force
on 5th June 2003, a significant one was the constitution of the Special
Court and combining in it both criminal and civil jurisdictions. Under
 Section 153 (3) , a person shall not be qualified for appointment as a
Judge of a Special Court unless he was, immediately before such
appointment, an Additional District and Sessions Judge. The other
unique feature of the Special Court was provided in Section 154 of the
Act which dealt with its procedures and powers. What was envisaged,
as far as criminal liability was concerned, was a summary procedure in
the first place with flexibility to the Special Court, depending on the

 Crl. A. Nos.1051 to 1056 of 2008 nature of the case, to try it in a regular manner as provided by the Cr
PC.
 

 15. The scheme of Section 154 of the Act is that a Special Court will
proceed to determine the criminal liability as regards the offences that
have been described in Sections 135 to 140 and Section 150 of the Act.
It will also determine the civil liability. The third aspect of the matter is
that the Special Court will also proceed to recover the amount
determined as civil liability as if it were a decree of civil court. 
 

 16. Section 154(5) of the Act has to be read together with the
Explanation provided thereunder and it reads as under:
 154. Procedure and power of Special Court.--
 .....
 (5) The Special Court shall determine the civil liability
 against a consumer or a person in terms of money for theft of
 energy which shall not be less than an amount equivalent to
 two times of the tariff rate applicable for a period of twelve
 months preceding the date of detection of theft of energy or
 the exact period of theft if determined whichever is less and
 the amount of civil liability so determined shall be recovered
 as if it were a decree of civil court.
 ......
 Explanation.--For the purposes of this section, civil
 liability means loss or damage incurred by the Board of
 licensee or the concerned person, as the case may be, due to
 the commission of an offence referred to in sections 135 to
 140 and section 150 . 
 
 17. The Explanation in Section 154 provides the link between the
exercise of the two jurisdictions of the Special Court, i.e., the criminal
jurisdiction and the civil jurisdiction. The definition of „civil liability‟
in terms of Explanation is exclusive. It „means‟ loss or damage that is
incurred due to commission of an offence. The word due to 
 necessarily requires the Special Court to first determine the criminal

 Crl. A. Nos.1051 to 1056 of 2008 liability arising out of the commission of an offence punishable under
 Sections 135 to 140 and Section 150 of the Act.
 

 18. If, in a given case, at the end of a trial, the Special Court comes to
the conclusion that no offence is made out against the Respondents
before it, the question of the Special Court thereafter determining the
civil liability cannot arise. There is only one trial for determining both
the criminal liability as well as the civil liability. It is on the same
evidence that both liabilities have to be determined. In fact, it was fairly
stated by Mr. Fernandes that the understanding of the provision by
BRPL was such that in the event of a full-fledged trial resulting in
acquittal of an accused, the question of requiring the Special Court to
determine the civil liability does not arise. Indeed, in such cases, where
the acquittal orders have attained finality, BRPL had promptly obeyed
the consequential orders requiring it to refund the amounts that may
have been deposited when the proceedings were pending.
 

 19. The question that arises in the present cases is in the context of
compounding of the criminal offence under Section 152 of the Act,
which reads as under:
 152. Compounding of offences.----(1) Notwithstanding anything
contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure , 1973 (2 of 1974), the
Appropriate Government or any officer authorised by it in this behalf
may
accept from any consumer or person who committed or who is
reasonably suspected of having committed an offence of theft of
electricity punishable under this Act, a sum of money by way of
compounding of the offence as specified in the Table below:
 
 TABLE
Nature of Service Rate at which the sum of money for
 compounding to be collected per
 Kilowatt (KW)/Horse Power (HP) or
 part thereof for Low Tension (LT)
 Crl. A. Nos.1051 to 1056 of 2008 supply and per Kilo Volt Ampere
 (KVA) of contracted demand for High
 Tension (HT)
(1) (2)
 1. Industrial Service twenty thousand rupees;
 2. Commercial Service ten thousand rupees;
 3. Agricultural Service two thousand rupees;
 4. Other Services four thousand rupees:
 
 Provided that the Appropriate Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, amend the rates specified in the Table above.
 
 (2) On payment of the sum of money in accordance with sub-section
(1), any person in custody in connection with that offence shall be set at
liberty and no proceedings shall be instituted or continued against such
consumer or person in any criminal court.
 
 (3) The acceptance of the sum of money for compounding an offence in
accordance with sub-section (1) by the Appropriate Government or an
officer empowered in this behalf shall be deemed to amount to an
acquittal within the meaning of section 300 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).
 
 (4) The compounding of an offence under sub-section (1) shall be
allowed only once for any person or consumer. 
 
 20. Section 152(1) begins with the non-obstante clause and vests power
in the appropriate government or an officer authorised by it to
compound an offence. In this respect, it is different from the scheme of
Section 320(2) Cr PC where the compounding is with the permission of
the Court before which the adjudication is in progress. However, the
result of such compounding is no different from the result of
compounding, as explained under Section 320 (8) Cr PC. Under
 Section 152(3) , once the compounding of fee is accepted by the
appropriate government or an officer empowered, it shall be deemed
to amount to an acquittal within the meaning of Section 300 Cr PC.
Under Section 152 (4) of the Act, compounding of an offence can be
allowed only once for a consumer.
 Crl. A. Nos.1051 to 1056 of 2008 21. This Court had in Radhey Shyam Bansal v. B.S.E.S. Rajdhani
Power Ltd. (supra) occasion to examine Section 152 of the Act. The
context there was a consumer approaching the Special Court with an
application under Section 152 for compounding the offence and the
BRPL insisting before the Special Court that without payment of the
theft bill amount, it could not agree to the compounding. That plea of
BRPL was accepted by the Special Court. The consumer then
approached this Court, assailing the order of the Special Court,
rejecting his application for compounding of the offence under Section
152 of the Act. After analysing Section 152 of the Act and drawing a
distinction between the said provision and Section 200 of the Motor
Vehicles Act, 1988, this Court observed as under: 
 9. The legislative intent as is evident from a plain reading of
 Section 152 shows that compounding of an offence has to be
 preceded by a bilateral agreement between the complainant
 which is BRPL and the accused. In sub-section (3) the words
 the acceptance of the sum of money for compounding an
 offence in accordance with sub-section (1) by the Appropriate
 Government or an officer empowered in this behalf ....... 
 indicate that the offer of the compounding fee by the accused
 has to be accepted by the authorized officer as designated by the
 Appropriate Government. Secondly, the words in sub-section
 (1) to the effect may accept from any consumer ..... indicate
 that this is a discretionary power and it is not in each and every
 case that the authorized officer is required to accept the
 compounding fee for compounding the offence. Sub-section (4)
 also indicates that this is a one-time measure vis-à-vis the
 consumer.
 ......
 
 13. As regards the contention whether a condition in addition to
 what is evident from the statute can be imposed for accepting
 the compounding fee, it requires to be observed that the
 compounding is of the offence by the Petitioner and the fee is
 for compounding that offence. It would be inconceivable that
 the complainant can be expected to accept the compounding fee
 without the theft bill being discharged. Viewed in this context,
 the insistence by the Respondent No.1 that the theft bill would

 Crl. A. Nos.1051 to 1056 of 2008 have to be paid as a pre-condition to accept the compounding
 fee, cannot be said to be unreasonable or illegal. 
 

 22. The Court would like to reiterate that there cannot be any
compounding of the offence without the consent of a complainant. This
is evident from the scheme of not only Section 320 Cr PC, but even
 Section 152 of the Act. While Section 152 permits compounding order
to be passed by the appropriate government, it does not dispense with
the need to obtain the consent for such compounding by the
Complainant, which in this case is BRPL. The decision in Radhey
Shyam Bansal still holds the field and is required to be followed by the
appropriate government under Section 152 of the Act. The order of the
DC in the present cases was passed prior to the decision in Radhey
Shyam Bansal. It is evident that to the extent the order of the DC
overrides the objection of BRPL to the compounding where, again, it
insisted on consumer paying the theft bill amount as a pre-condition to
it agreeing to the compounding , the said decision of the DC is contrary
to the law, as explained by this Court in Radhey Shyam Bansal.
 

 23. BRPL could have challenged the order of the DC in the present
cases, in light of the law explained in Radhey Shyam Bansal.
However, it appears that in view of the DC‟s order permitting the
question of civil liability to be determined by the Special Court, BRPL
opted not to do so. The decision in Radhey Shyam Bansal was also not
referred to before the Special Court when it passed the impugned order
dated 7th November 2008. Therefore, as far as the present cases are
concerned, BRPL cannot possibly be now permitted to urge that the
question of criminal liability should be gone into afresh. However, it is
made clear that in light of the law explained in Radhey Shyam Bansal,
the appropriate government, while exercising powers under Section 152 
 Crl. A. Nos.1051 to 1056 of 2008 of the Act, should ensure that there is consent of BRPL to the proposal
for compounding put forth by a consumer.
 

 24. As far as the question raised by BRPL in the present appeals is
concerned, the Court accepts the submission put forth by learned
counsel for the Respondents that the scheme of Section 154 of the Act
is such that the criminal and civil liability are intrinsically linked. In
 B.L. Kantroo v. BSES Rajdhani Power Ltd. the DB was considering
the plea of a consumer who sought a declaration of invalidation of an
electricity bill and in that context held that the exclusive jurisdiction to
determine such question, in terms of Section 145 of the Act, vested in
the Special Court. The DB was not dealing with a situation where there
has been a compounding of the offence under Section 152 of the Act
and whether in such eventuality, the Special Court could still determine
the civil liability under Sections 154 (5) of the Act. 
 

 25. In view of the Explanation to Section 154 the submission of
Mr. Fernandes that Section 154(5) is a stand-alone provision should
fail. In other words, it is not possible to accept the submission that a
Special Court can determine the civil liability against a consumer or a
person in terms of money for theft of energy irrespective of there
being a deemed acquittal of such consumer as a result of the
compounding of the offence under Section 152 (3) of the Act. The
Explanation is clear that determination of the civil liability has to
necessarily be preceded by a positive determination of the commission
of the offence . In terms of the Explanation, the quantum of the civil
liability has necessarily to be loss or damage incurred...... due to the
commission of an offence...... If, in fact, there is no determination of
commission of an offence, it is not possible for the Special Court to
proceed to determine the civil liability. In other words, a collective
 Crl. A. Nos.1051 to 1056 of 2008 reading of Section 152 , Section 154(5) and the Explanation to Section
154 reveals that the legislature did not intend that a different set of
consequences should follow where acquittal was not at the end of a
full-fledged criminal trial but on account of a „deemed acquittal‟ as a
result of the compounding of the offence under Section 152 of the Act.
 

 26. The view expressed by the Special Court that since it is a criminal
court, it cannot determine the civil liability, is incorrect in view of the
scheme of Section 154 of the Act. However, the conclusion in the
impugned order of the Special Court that there cannot be any
determination of the civil liability in the face of an acquittal as a result
of compounding of the offence under Section 152 of the Act cannot be
faulted. It is clarified that the orders passed by DC under Section 152 
which have already attained finality will not be affected by the present
order.
 

 27. The appeals are disposed of with the above clarification of the legal
issues but, in the circumstances, with no order as to costs.
 

 S. MURALIDHAR, J.
 DECEMBER 10, 2014
tp

 Crl. A. Nos.1051 to 1056 of 2008
