Hindustan Zinc Limited vs State Of Raj. Ors on 9 November, 2012 

 Equivalent citations: AIR 2013 (NOC) 289 (RAJ.) 

 Bench: Arun Mishra , Sangeet Lodha 

 1


 IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE FOR RAJASTHAN AT
 JODHPUR

 JUDGMENT


 (1). HINDUSTAN ZINC LIMITED VS. STATE OF RAJASTHAN ORS.
Reportable (D.B.CIVIL WRIT PETITION NO.9994/10)
 (2). M/S. INDUSTRIAL MINERAL SUPPLIERS VS. STATE OF
 RAJASTHAN ORS.
 (D.B.CIVIL WRIT PETITION NO.3391/07)
 (3). CHANDRA KUMAR KOCHAR VS. STATE OF RAJASTHAN ORS.
 (D.B.CIVIL WRIT PETITION NO.4945/08)
 (4). M/S. JAICHAND LAL DAGA VS. STATE OF RAJASTHAN ORS.
 (D.B.CIVIL WRIT PETITION NO. 4946/08 )
 (5). UMMED SINGH RATHORE VS. STATE OF RAJASTHAN ORS.
 (D.B.CIVIL WRIT PETITION NO. 4947/08)
 (6). M/S. SAMPAT LAL DAGA VS. STATE OF RAJASTHAN ORS.
 (D.B.CIVIL WRIT PETITION NO. 4950/08)
 (7). M/S. K.G. MINES MINERALS VS. STATE OF RAJASTHAN ORS.
 (D.B.CIVIL WRIT PETITION NO. 5070/08)
 (8). SUNDER LAL DAGA VS. STATE OF RAJASTHAN ORS.
 (D.B.CIVIL WRIT PETITION NO. 5071/08)
 (9). M/S. TAHLA RAM SONS VS. STATE OF RAJASTHAN ORS.
 (D.B.CIVIL WRIT PETITION NO. 5072/08)
 (10). SORABH CHANDANA VS. STATE OF RAJASTHAN ORS.
 (D.B.CIVIL WRIT PETITION NO. 5073/08)
 (11). M/S. ASHOK LEYLAND LIMITED VS. STATE OF RAJASTHAN 
 ORS.
 (D.B.CIVIL WRIT PETITION NO. 5182/09)
 (12). HINDUSTAN ZINC LIMITED VS. STATE OF RAJASTHAN ORS.
 (D.B.CIVIL WRIT PETITION NO. 11254/09)
 (13). M/S. ASHOK LEYLAND VS. STATE OF RAJASTHAN ORS.
 (D.B.CIVIL WRIT PETITION NO. 5089/10)
 (14). M/S. ASHOK LEYLAND VS. STATE OF RAJASTHAN ORS.
 (D.B.CIVIL WRIT PETITION NO. 5090/10)
 (15). UMMED SINGH RATHORE VS. STATE OF RAJASTHAN ORS.
 (D.B.CIVIL WRIT PETITION NO. 6050/10)
 (16). M/S. K.G. MINES MINERALS VS. STATE OF RAJASTHAN 
 ORS.
 (D.B.CIVIL WRIT PETITION NO. 6052/10)
 (17). M/S. SANTA SALE CORPORATION VS. STATE OF RAJASTHAN 
 ORS.
 (D.B.CIVIL WRIT PETITION NO. 6053/10)
 (18). M/S. JAICHAND LAL DAGA VS. STATE OF RAJASTHAN ORS.
 (D.B.CIVIL WRIT PETITION NO. 6055/10)
 (19). VIJAY KUMAR SHAMRA VS. STATE OF RAJASTHAN ORS.
 (D.B.CIVIL WRIT PETITION NO. 6060/10)
 (20). SUNDER LAL DAGA VS. STATE OF RAJASTHAN ORS.
 (D.B.CIVIL WRIT PETITION NO. 6061/10)
 (21). HINDUSTAN ZINC LIMITED VS. STATE OF RAJASTHAN ORS.
 (D.B.CIVIL WRIT PETITION NO. 9995/10)
 (22). HINDUSTAN ZINC LIMITED VS. STATE OF RAJASTHAN ORS.
 (D.B.CIVIL WRIT PETITION NO. 144/11)
 (23). HINDUSTAN ZINC LIMITED VS. STATE OF RAJASTHAN ORS.
 2

 (D.B.CIVIL WRIT PETITION NO. 148/11)
(24). HINDUSTAN ZINC LIMITED VS. STATE OF RAJASTHAN ORS.
 (D.B.CIVIL WRIT PETITION NO. 150/11)
(25). M/S. ASHOK LEYLAND LIMITED VS. STATE OF RAJASTHAN 
 ORS.
 (D.B.CIVIL WRIT PETITION NO. 868/11)
(26). HINDUSTAN ZINC LIMITED VS. STATE OF RAJASTHAN ORS.
 (D.B.CIVIL WRIT PETITION NO. 3008/11)
(27). M/S. ASHOK LEYLAND LIMITED VS. STATE OF RAJASTHAN 
 ORS.
 (D.B.CIVIL WRIT PETITION NO. 5475/11)
(28). SUZLON GUJARAT WIND PARK LTD. VS. STATE OF RAJASTHAN 
 ORS.
 (D.B.CIVIL WRIT PETITION NO. 6025/11)
(29). SYNEFRA ENGINEERING CONSTRUCTION LTD. VS. STATE OF
 RAJASTHAN ORS.
 (D.B.CIVIL WRIT PETITION NO. 6026/11)
(30). SARJAN INFRASTRUCTURE FINANCE LTD. VS. STATE OF
 RAJASTHAN ORS.
 (D.B.CIVIL WRIT PETITION NO. 6027/11)
(31). SUZLON ENERGY LTD. VS. STATE OF RAJASTHAN ORS.
 (D.B.CIVIL WRIT PETITION NO. 6028/11)
(32). VIJAY KUMAR SHARMA VS. STATE OF RAJASTHAN ORS.
 (D.B.CIVIL WRIT PETITION NO. 7660/11)
(33). M/S. SAMPAT LAL DAGA VS. STATE OF RAJASTHAN ORS.
 (D.B.CIVIL WRIT PETITION NO. 8344/11)
(34). UMMED SINGH RATHORE VS. STATE OF RAJASTHAN ORS.
 (D.B.CIVIL WRIT PETITION NO. 8377/11)
(35). M/S. JAICHAND LAL DAGA VS. STATE OF RAJASTHAN ORS.
 (D.B.CIVIL WRIT PETITION NO. 8382/11)
(36). CHANDRA KUMAR KOCHAR VS. STATE OF RAJASTHAN ORS.
 (D.B.CIVIL WRIT PETITION NO. 8383/11)
(37). M/S. TAHLA RAM SONS VS. STATE OF RAJASTHAN ORS.
 (D.B.CIVIL WRIT PETITION NO. 8384/11)
(38). M/S SANTA SALE CORPORATION VS. STATE OF RAJASTHAN 
 ORS.
 (D.B.CIVIL WRIT PETITION NO. 8847/11)
(39). SUZLON ENERGY LIMITED VS. STATE OF RAJASTHAN ORS.
 (D.B.CIVIL WRIT PETITION NO. 10951/11)
(40). SYNEFRA ENGINEER CONSTRUCTION LTD. VS. STATE OF
 RAJASTHAN ORS.
 (D.B.CIVIL WRIT PETITION NO. 11293/11)
(41). OIL NATURAL GAS CORPORATION LTD. VS. STATE OF
 RAJASTHAN ORS.
 (D.B.CIVIL WRIT PETITION NO. 12290/11)
(42). OIL NATURAL GAS CORPORATION LTD.VS. STATE OF
 RAJASTHAN ORS.
 (D.B.CIVIL WRIT PETITION NO. 12291/11 )
(43). OIL NATURAL GAS CORPORATION LTD. VS. STATE OF
 RAJASTHAN ORS.
 (D.B.CIVIL WRIT PETITION NO. 12292/11)
(44). OIL NATURAL GAS CORPORATION LTD.VS. STATE OF
 RAJASTHAN ORS.
 (D.B.CIVIL WRIT PETITION NO. 12293/11)
(45). SUZLON GUJARAT WIND PARK LTD. VS. STATE OF RAJASTHAN
 ORS.
 (D.B.CIVIL WRIT PETITION NO. 12881/11)
 3

(46). SUZLON ENERGY LTD. VS. STATE OF RAJASTHAN ORS.
 (D.B.CIVIL WRIT PETITION NO. 12882/11)
(47). M/S. KHETAN BUSINESS CORPORATION PRIVATE LTD. VS.
 STATE OF RAJASTHAN ORS.
 (D.B.CIVIL WRIT PETITION NO. 12998/11)
(48). RAJ WEST POWER LIMITED VS. STATE OF RAJASTHAN ORS.
 (D.B.CIVIL WRIT PETITION NO. 863/12)
(49). M/S. CHEMICAL LIME MUNDAWA PVT. LTD. VS. STATE OF
 RAJASTHAN ORS.
 (D.B.CIVIL WRIT PETITION NO. 1144/12)
(50). SARJAN REALITIES LTD. VS. STATE OF RAJASTHAN ORS.
 (D.B.CIVIL WRIT PETITION NO. 1315/12)
(51). AMBUJA CEMENTS LTD. VS. STATE OF RAJASTHAN ORS.
 (D.B.CIVIL WRIT PETITION NO. 1817/12)
(52). BIRLA CEMENT WORKS VS. STATE OF RAJASTHAN ORS.
 (D.B.CIVIL WRIT PETITION NO. 1917/12)
(53). M/S. SUZLON GUJARAT WIND PARK LTD., JAIPUR VS. STATE
 OF RAJASTHAN ORS.
 (D.B.CIVIL WRIT PETITION NO. 2132/12)
(54). SYNEFRA ENGINEERING CONSTRUCTION LTD. VS. STATE OF
 RAJASTHAN ORS.
 (D.B.CIVIL WRIT PETITION NO. 2133/12)
(55). SUZLON ENERGY LIMITED VS. STATE OF RAJASTHAN ORS.
 (D.B.CIVIL WRIT PETITION NO. 2134/12)
(56). BARMER LIGNITE MINING COMPANY LTD. VS. STATE OF
 RAJASTHAN ORS.
 (D.B.CIVIL WRIT PETITION NO. 2173/12)
(57). M/S. CALCIUM MINERALS VS. STATE OF RAJASTHAN ORS.
 (D.B.CIVIL WRIT PETITION NO. 2243/12)
(58). M/S. SUZLON GUJARAT WIND PARK LTD., JAIPUR VS. STATE
 OF RAJASTHAN ORS.
 (D.B.CIVIL WRIT PETITION NO. 2405/12)
(59). SUZLON ENERGY LIMITED, AHMEDABAD VS. STATE OF
 RAJASTHAN ORS.
 (D.B.CIVIL WRIT PETITION NO. 2436/12)
(60). M/S. ULTRA TECH CEMENT LTD. VS. STATE OF RAJASTHAN 
 ORS.
 (D.B.CIVIL WRIT PETITION NO. 2617/12)
(61). M/S. ULTRA TECH CEMENT LTD. VS. STATE OF RAJASTHAN 
 ORS.
 (D.B.CIVIL WRIT PETITION NO. 2618/12)
(62). ENERCON (INDIA) LTD. VS. STATE OF RAJASTHAN ORS.
 (D.B.CIVIL WRIT PETITION NO. 2680/12)
(63). SYNEFRA ENGINEERING CONSTRUCTION LTD. VS. STATE OF
 RAJASTHAN ORS.
 (D.B.CIVIL WRIT PETITION NO. 2711/12)
(64). M/S. SALENE POWER INFRASTRUCTURE LTD. VS. STATE OF
 RAJASTHAN ORS.
 (D.B.CIVIL WRIT PETITION NO. 2870/12)
(65). HINDUSTAN ZINC LIMITED VS. STATE OF RAJASTHAN ORS.
 (D.B.CIVIL WRIT PETITION NO. 3024/12)
(66). M/S. ULTRATECH CEMENT LTD. VS. STATE OF RAJASTHAN 
 ORS.
 (D.B.CIVIL WRIT PETITION NO. 3364/12)
(67). M/S.ULTRA TECH CEMENT LTD. VS. STATE OF RAJASTHAN 
 ORS.
 (D.B.CIVIL WRIT PETITION NO. 3367/12)
 4

(68). M/S. BHOODAN COMPANY VS. STATE OF RAJASTHAN ORS.
 (D.B.CIVIL WRIT PETITION NO. 3787/12)
(69). M/S. ASHOK LEYLAND LIMITED VS.STATE OF RAJASTHAN ORS.
 (D.B.CIVIL WRIT PETITION NO. 4769/12)
(70). V.S. LIGNITE POWER PRIVATE LTD. VS. STATE OF RAJASTHAN
 ORS.
 (D.B.CIVIL WRIT PETITION NO. 5012/12)
(71). M/S. SILVER SHADOW EXPORT PVT. LTD.VS. STATE OF
 RAJASTHAN ORS.
 (D.B.CIVIL WRIT PETITION NO. 6854/12)
(72). SYNEFRA ENGINEERING CONSTRUCTION LTD. VS. STATE OF
 RAJASTHAN ORS.
 (D.B.CIVIL WRIT PETITION NO. 8040/12)
(73). M/S. SUZLON GUJARAT WIND PARK LTD. VS. STATE OF
 RAJASTHAN ORS.
 (D.B.CIVIL WRIT PETITION NO. 8041/12)
(74) M/S. KHETAN BUSINESS CORPORATION PVT. LTD. VS. STATE OF
 RAJASTHAN ORS.
 (D.B.CIVIL WRIT PETITION NO.7993/08)
(75) SIGMA MINERALS LTD. VS. STATE OF RAJASTHAN ORS.
 (D.B.CIVIL WRIT PETITION NO.504/10)

Date of Judgment :- 9th November,2012.


 HON BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE MR. ARUN MISHRA
 HON BLE MR.JUSTICE SANGEET LODHA

Mr. M.S.Singhvi, Senior Advocate assisted by
Mr. Vineet Dave Akhilesh Rajpurohit )
Mr. B.L.Purohit 
Mr. J.L.Purohit, Senior Advocate assisted by
Mr. N.R.Budania Rajeev Purohit )
Mr. D.R.Bhandari )
Mr. Ramit Mehta )
Mr. Digvijay Singh Jasol ) for the petitioners.
Mr. Arvind Shrimali )
Mr. Amit Dave )
Mr. B.M.Bohra )
Mr. Deen Dayal Purohit )

Mr. R.L.Jangid, Additional Advocate General assisted by
Mr. H.S.Bishnoi )
Mr. K.K.Bissa ) for the respondents.


BY THE COURT (PER HON BLE MR.SANGEET LODHA,J.) 

 1. These writ petitions are directed against provisional/final

assessment orders passed by the Assessing Authority creating

demand of land tax against the petitioners under the

provisions of Rajasthan Finance Act, 2006 (for short the Act ).
 5 

The vires of Rule 2(h) and Rule 24(1) (2) of the Rajasthan

Land Tax Rules, 2006 (for short the Rules ) is also under

challenge. Besides, in the Writ Petition No.6854/12, there is

challenge to vires of Section 38(d) Section 39 of the Act as

well.
 
 2. The State Legislature enacted the Act inter alia to

provide for levy of tax on land in the State of Rajasthan,

which has come into force w.e.f. 31.3.06. The land which is

covered for imposition of tax under the Act stands defined by

 Section 38(c) of the Act. The definition of land has been

couched in negative terms inasmuch as it excludes from its

ambit the land held or used exclusively for agricultural or

residential purpose or an urban land as defined in Rajasthan

Land and Building Tax Act, 1964 or an abadi land as defined

in clause (b) of Section 103 of the Rajasthan Land Revenue

Act, 1956. Obviously, all lands except the land specifically

excluded from the purview of levy of land tax are liable to be

taxed under the Act. The land holders, who are liable to pay

the land tax has been defined under Section 38(d) to mean, a

person who holds or uses the land as its owner, tenant,

lessee, licensee, grantee or under any right or contract or in

any other capacity. As per provisions of Section 39 of the Act,

tax is leviable on such classes of land at such rates for each

year, as may be specified by the State Government from time
 6 

to time by notification in Official Gazette. However, as per first

proviso to Section 39, the rate of tax under the said section

shall not exceed ten percent of the market value of the land.

Second proviso to Section 39 excludes certain specified

categories of the land from levy or collection of tax.

 3. The procedure for provisional and final assessment has

been laid down under Section 40 to 43 of the Act. As per

scheme of the Act in the first instance a provisional

assessment list of all lands liable to pay the tax shall be

prepared or cause to be prepared by the Assessing Authority.

After preparation of provisional assessment list, the Assessing

Authority is required to give a public notice inviting land

holders of the land mentioned in the list to inspect the same

or to take extract therefrom. Any person aggrieved by any

entry in the provisional list or by insertion therein or omission

therefrom of any matter or otherwise with respect to the list is

entitled to file objection in respect thereof before the

Assessing Authority within a period of thirty days from the

date on which the list is made available for inspection,

however, the Assessing Authority on sufficient cause been

shown may entertain the objections filed by an objector

beyond thirty days of the date of receipt of the demand notice

under the provisions of sub-section (2) of Section 47 of the

Act.
 7 

 4. The petitioners, land holders are aggrieved by the

provisional/final assessments made by the Assessing Authority

under the provisions of the Act and the demand notices issued

pursuant thereto. The challenge is made on various grounds

such as that the petitioners are not amenable to land tax for

the reason that the land held by them is not covered by the

definition of the land incorporated under Section 2(c) of the

Act, they are not land holders within the meaning of Section

2(d) of the Act and further that the land held by them stands

excluded from the liability of tax by virtue of Second proviso

to Section 39 of the Act. The assessment of the tax on the

basis of market value of the land held by the petitioners for

mining purposes is also questioned. In all the petitions filed,

the validity of Rule 24(1) of the Rules, which provides for

assessment of market value of the land on the basis of rates

recommended by the District Level Committee (DLC) or the

rates approved by Inspector General, Registration and Stamps

(IG R S), from time to time, whichever is higher is also under

challenge. The validity of final assessment orders/demand

notices is also questioned on the ground that before passing

the assessment order/creating the demands, no opportunity

of hearing was afforded to the petitioners-assessees and the

same suffers from non-application of mind.
 
 5. The contentions of the learned counsel for the parties
 8 

roll round the provisions of Sections 38(c) (d), 39, 40 to 42,

45, 48 of the Act and Rule 24 of the Rules, which may be

beneficially quoted :
 
 38(c) land shall not include the land held or used
 exclusively for agricultural or residential purpose or an
 urban land as defined in the Rajasthan Land and Building
 Tax Act 1964 (Act No.18 of 1964) or an abadi land as
 defined in clause (b) of section 103 of the Rajasthan
 Land Revenue Act, 1956 (Act No.15 of 1956);
 

 38(d) land holder means a person who holds or uses
 the land as its owner, tenant, lessee, licensee, grantee
 or under any right or contract or in any other capacity;
 

 39. Levy of tax and its rate.- Subject to other
 provisions of this Chapter, there shall be levied and
 collected for each year a tax on such classes of land at
 such rates, as may be specified by the State
 Government from time to time by notification in the
 official Gazette:
 Provided that the rate of tax under this section
 shall not exceed ten percent of the market value of the
 land:
 Provided further that no tax shall be levied or
 collected on the land-
 (a) Owned by -
 (i) the Central Government; or
 (ii)the State Government or a local authority
 except where such land or a right connected
 therewith is leased out otherwise given for
 its use to any person,institution or
 corporation etc on payment or without
 9 

 payment; or
 (b) held or used -
 (i) as a wakf property;
 (ii) by the Devasthan Department of
 the State Government;
 (iii) for public worship or public purpose;
 (iv) for purposes connected with the disposal
 of dead bodies;
 (v) by an educational institution solely for
 purpose of education; or

 (vi) for public parks, public libraries or
 public museums.
 

 40. Preparation of the provisional assessment list.-
 (1) The Assessing Authority shall prepare or cause to be
prepared, in such manner and containing such
particulars as may be prescribed, a provisional
assessment list of all lands liable to pay the tax.
(2) The assessing Authority Shall, in preparing the list,
determine the taxable value of, and the amount of the
tax to be assessed on, all lands liable to pay the tax and
same shall be duly shown in the list.
 (3) When the provisional assessment list has been
prepared the Assessing Authority shall give public notice
of the same in such manner and containing such
particulars as may be prescribed, and every persons
claiming to be the land holder of the land mentioned in
the list shall be at liberty to inspect the same and to take
extracts therefrom without payment of any charge.
 

 41. Objection to the entries in the list.- Any person
aggrieved by any entry in the provisional assessment
 10 

list, or by the insertion therein or omission therefrom of
any matter, or otherwise with respect to the list, may
within a period of thirty days from the date on which the
list is made available for inspection under sub-section
(3) of Section 4 , file objection in respect thereof before
the Assessing Authority:
 Provided that the Assessing Authority may, where he is
satisfied that the objector was prevented for sufficient
cause from filing the objection within the aforesaid
period, entertain an objection filed beyond the said
period, but not beyond thirty days of the date of receipt
of demand notice under sub-section (2) of section 47 .
 

 42. Finalisation of the assessment list.- (1) Where
no objection in respect of the land mentioned in the
provisional assessment list, is filed in accordance with
the provisions of section 41 , the entries in respect of
such land in the list shall be taken as final.
 (2) Where an objection in respect of the land
mentioned in the provisional assessment list is filed in
accordance with the provision of section 5 , the Assessing
Authority shall, after affording an opportunity of being
heard and producing evidence to the objector, decide
the objections and confirm, revise or modified the
entries in the provisional assessment list in respect of
such land.
 (3) The provisional assessment list shall there
upon be duly authenticated by the Assessing Authority
and, subject to any amendment, addition correction or
modification made under section 43 or section 44 or as a
result of any appeal under section 48 , for any revision
under section 51 , as the case may be, take as final. The
 11 

list as finalized shall be published and made available for
public inspection, in such manner as may be prescribed.
 (4) The list so finalized shall, subject to any
amendment, addition, correction or modification made
under section 43 or section 44 , or as a result of any
appeal under section 48 , or of any revision under section
51 , as the case may be take effect and come into force
with effect from 1st day of April following the date on
which it has been finalized and shall remain in force till
such time as a new list has been prepared and has come
into force:
 Provided that the list finalized for the first time
after the enforcement of this Chapter shall take effect
and be deemed to have come into force with effect from
such date as may be notified by the State Government
in the Official Gazette.
 (5) The Assessing Authority may, in any manner laid
down in section 40, 41 and sub-section (1) to (4) of this
section, prepare a new list in every five or even earlier
provided that the State Government so desires.
 

 45. Conclusiveness of entries in the list.- An entry in
an assessment list, in respect of any land mentioned
therein, shall, for the period the list is or has been in
force, the conclusive proof for any purpose connected
with the tax.
 
 
 48. Appeals.- (1) Any person aggrieved by an order
under section 42 , 43 or 44, may at any time before the
expiry of thirty days from the date of the order prefer an
appeal to the Appellate Authority:
 Provided that no appeal shall be entertained unless
 12 

it is accompanied by satisfactory proof of payment of not
less than one half of tax assessed and payable by the
person preferring the appeal.
 (2) The Appellate Authority may admit an appeal
after the expiry of the period referred to in sub-section
(1), if he is satisfied that there was sufficient cause for
to not preferring the appeal within that period.
 (3) Every appeal under this section shall be
presented and verified in the manner prescribed.
 (4) The Appellate Authority shall, after affording an
opportunity of being heard to the Appellant, pass such
order on the appeal as its thinks fit and shall sent a copy
of the order to the Assessing Authority and such other
persons as may be prescribed.
 (5) The assessment list shall, where necessary, be
modified in accordance with the decision of the Appellate
Authority.
 

 Rule 24 of the Rules


 24. Procedure for assessment of the market value
of the land.-
 (1) The market value of land shall be assessed by the
Assessing Authority on the basis of the rates
recommended by the District Level Committee or the
rates approved by the Inspector General, Registration
and Stamps from time to time, whichever is higher.
(2) If the rates of land recommended by the District
Level Committee are not revised within one year from
the date of such recommendation or if the market value
of land in any area has extra ordinarily increased or
decreased, the State Government suo moto or on a
 13 

 reference made by the Inspector General, Registration
 and Stamps redetermine by order the rates of the land
 in such areas on the basis of the recommendations made
 by a committee consisting of Secretary Finance as
 Chairman and Inspector General, Registration and
 Stamp, Dy. Secretary Finance (Tax), Collector of
 concerned District and a Public Representative of that
 District nominated by the Government as member. The
 rates so determined shall be the basis of assessment of
 the market value of the land with effect from the date
 specified in such order and be valid until the District
 Level Committee revises the rates so determined. 



 6. Mr. M.S. Singhvi, Senior Advocate contended that Rule

24 of the Rules is ultra vires, powers of State Government

inasmuch as it travels beyond the scope of charging section

i.e. Section 39 of the Act. It is submitted that proviso to

Section 39 limits the rate of tax upto ten percent of market

value of the land, however, by Rule 24 of the Rules it is

mandated the market value of the land shall be assessed by

the Assessing Authority on the basis of the rates

recommended by DLC or the rates approved by IG R S from

time to time, whichever is higher. It is submitted that there is

no mandate of the legislature that the land tax is to be

charged on market value alone and, therefore, by way of

subordinate legislation the State Government cannot make a

mandatory provision for assessment of the land tax on the
 14 

basis of the market value of the land alone. That apart, it is

submitted that since the Act does not provide for assessment

of the market value of the land on the basis of the rates

determined by the DLC or approved by IG R S and,

therefore, Rule 24 of the Rules which enlarges the scope of

provisions of Section 39 of the Act is ultra vires powers of the

State Government.
 
 7. Learned counsel contended that the petitioners are

holding the land for mining purposes on lease hold basis

which are generally of duration of twenty years or less. It is

submitted that as per entry no.33(a)(ii) of the Schedule

appended to the Rajasthan Stamp Act, 1998 , where the land

is held on lease hold basis and lease is for a period up to

twenty years, the stamp duty is charged for a consideration

equivalent to the amount or value of average rent of two

years. It is submitted that DLC constituted under Rule 2(b) of

the Rajasthan Stamp Rules, 2004 or the IG R S has no

occasion to recommend the market value of the land held for

mining purposes. It is submitted that where the land held for

mining purposes is large in volume as in the case of Electricity

Generation Company and Oil Production Company, the

volume of land being large and rights being of lease hold basis

for excavation of mineral having expression of crude, the

market value of the land cannot constitute criteria for levy of
 15 

land tax on mineral bearing lands. It is submitted that the

volume of the land being large and till the excavation reaches

a particular part of the land, it is being used for agriculture or

other purposes and, therefore, levy of land tax on market

value for mineral bearing land, by making reference to Rule

24 is highly arbitrary and unreasonable.
 
 8. It is next contended by the learned counsel Mr. M.S.

Singhvi that sub clause (iii) to clause (b) of proviso to Section

39 categorically states that no land tax shall be levied or

collected on the land held or used for public purpose. Learned

counsel urged that so far as the land held and used by Oil

Production Companies and Power Generation Company are

concerned, the same are held as well as used for public

purposes. It is submitted that the lands held by the said

companies were acquired by the State Government by

resorting to the provisions of Land Acquisition Act, 1894 ( the

Act of 1894 ), and notification issued under Section 4 of the

Act of 1894 in respect of said companies categorically recites

that the land is being acquired for public purpose i.e. for

generation of electricity and exploration of crude oil.

Accordingly, it is submitted that there being specific exclusion

of the lands held for public purposes from levy of land tax, the

proceeding initiated by the Assessing Authority for levy of

land tax against the said companies are ex facie without
 16 

jurisdiction. In support of his contentions, learned counsel has

relied upon decisions of the Hon ble Supreme Court in the

matters of Pratibha Nema Ors. v. State of M.P. Ors. 

( 2003) 10 SCC, 626, The State of Karnataka Anr. v. Shri

Ranganatha Reddy Anr. ,( 1977) 4 SCC 471,Fomento Resorts

and Hotels Limited Anr. v. Minguel Martins Ors. , (2009) 3

SCC 571 and Soora Ram Pratap Reddy Ors. vs. District

Collector, Ranga Reddy District Ors., (2008) 9 SCC, 552. 

 9. Learned counsel submitted that even otherwise the

provisions incorporated exempting certain categories of the

land from levy of tax has to be construed liberally. In support

of his contention, learned counsel has placed reliance on the

decisions of Hon ble Supreme Court in Bombay Chemical(P)

Ltd v. Collector of Central Aexcise, Bombay I, Bombay , 1995

(Suppl)2 SCC 646, G.P.Ceramics Private Limited v.

Commissioner, Trade Tax, Uttar Pradesh , ( 2009) 2 SCC 90

and Mineral Area Development Authority v. Steel Authority

of India , (2011) 4 SCC 450. Learned counsel submitted that

the contention of the petitioners further stands fortified from

the fact that the State Government issued a notification dated

5.5.10, directing remission of stamp duty payable by the

petitioner-Raj West Power Limited on all instruments and

security documents, instrument executed for acquisition or

purchase of the land for setting up of thermal power plant and
 17 

instrument relating to the land allotted for the purposes of

mining of lignite. 
 
 10. Lastly, learned counsel submitted that the mineral

bearing land owned and possessed by the Khatedars or

covered by abadi land, ways, Nadi, Gochar etc. cannot be

subjected to levy of land tax under the provisions of the Act

and, therefore, the land tax assessed by the Assessing

Authority ignoring these aspects of the matter is contrary to

the provisions of Section 38(c) of the Act.
 
 11. Mr. B.L. Purohit, Senior Advocate submitted that the

provisions of Rule 24(1) of the Rules, directing the Assessing

Authority to assess the market value of the land for the

purposes of levy of land tax on the basis of DLC rates is

illegal, arbitrary and ultra vires, the provisions of the Act and

falls foul of Article 14 and 19(1)(g) of the Constitution of

India. Learned counsel submitted that the principle of

harmonious construction applied by the Hon ble Supreme

Court in Satyam Properties s case is not applicable to the

instant case even if Rule 24(1) is interpreted to mean that the

Assessing Authority is not bound to accept the DLC rates.

 12. Learned counsel contended that Chapter VII of the Act 

creates liability for tax against the land holders whereas the

petitioners are holding the land as mining lease holder and

the right conferred by the lease executed in their favour is
 18 

right in sub soil area mentioned in the lease with no right

over surface area of the land and, therefore, the petitioners

being not covered by definition of land holder in terms of

 Section 38(d) of the Act, cannot be held liable for payment of

land tax. In support of his contentions, learned counsel has

relied upon decisions of the Hon ble Supreme Court in the

matter of A.V.Fernandez v. The State of Kerala , AIR 1957

SC 657, K.Thippanna v. Varalakshmi , (2012) 3 SCC 576. 

 13. Learned counsel submitted that the Assessing Authority

has assessed the tax on the basis of market value of surface

area of the agriculture or residential land as suggested by DLC

appointed under the Stamp Act , which is irrelevant for

assessing market rates of sub soil areas. Learned counsel

submitted that as a matter of fact before assessing the

market value of the land, the Assessing Authority was

required to first decide the question whether the lands of

which the market value is to be determined is marketable,

since determination of market value implies that land is

marketable. In this regard,learned counsel has relied upon

decisions of the Hon ble Supreme Court in the matter of M/s.

Indian Cable Company Ltd. v. Collector of Central Excise,

Calcutta Ors. , AIR 1995 SC 64, A.P.State Electricity Board

vs. Collector of Central Excise, Hyderabad , 1994 (1) JT (SC)

 545.
 19 

 14. Learned counsel submitted that the demand has been

created by the Assessing Authority in gross violation of

principles of natural justice inasmuch as after publishing the

provisional assessment list, the objections raised by the

petitioners have been rejected without giving an opportunity

of hearing and, therefore, the impugned assessment

orders/demands deserves to be quashed and set aside for this

reason alone.
 
 15. Learned counsel Mr. Dalpat Raj Bhandari appearing for

petitioner-M/s Silver Shadow Export Private Limited, while

adopting the contentions raised by the learned counsel Mr.

M.S. Singhvi and Mr. B.L. Purohit further submitted that the

provisions of Section 38(c) 39 of the Act are beyond the

legislative competence of the State Legislature under entry

no.49 of the list II of VII Schedule of the Constitution of India.

It is submitted that the tax imposed under the Act puts

unreasonable restriction and hampers the business/

occupation of the petitioner and, therefore, the same is

violative of Article 19(1)(g) of the Constitution of India. It is

submitted that the rate of tax must be fixed under the Act and

not under the rule making power and, therefore, while

incorporating Section 39 of the Act, which makes provision

for levy of land tax revisable every year but does not provide

for the rate of tax, the Legislature has failed to discharge its
 20 

duty in making law appropriately.
 
 16. Mr. Ramit Mehta, learned counsel while adopting the

arguments advanced by Mr. M.S.Singhvi and Mr. B.L.Purohit,

Senior Advocates, submitted that despite this court

remanding the matters to the Assessing Authorities to frame

fresh assessment orders after providing opportunity of

hearing to the concerned assessees, keeping in view the

provisions of the Act, again the final assessment orders have

been passed by the Assessing Authorities, in a slip shod

manner, without affording an opportunity of hearing to the

concerned assessees. Learned counsel submitted that as laid

down by a Bench of this court in the matter of Janak Raj 

Ors. vs. State of Rajasthan Ors. , 2010(3) WLC, 469, the

assessment of the rate by DLC cannot be treated conclusive

proof of market value of the land. 
 
 17. All other learned counsel appearing for other respective

petitioners have adopted the arguments advanced by Mr. M.S.

Singhvi and Mr. B.L. Purohit, Senior Advocates.

 18. On the other hand, Mr. R.L.Jangid, Additional Advocate

General submitted that the question with regard to vires of

the provisions of the Act and the Rules made thereunder

stands set at rest by a Bench decision of this Court in GKW

Ltd. s case (supra), and therefore, the petitioners cannot be

permitted to question the validity thereof all over again on
 21 

any additional ground. Learned AAG submitted that as per

provisions of Section 39 of the Act, the tax on the land as

defined under Section 38 (c) of the Act shall be levied and

collected for each year at such rate, as may be specified by

the State Government from time to time by notification in

Official Gazette, but, as per proviso to Section 39, rate of tax

under the said section shall not exceed ten percent of the

market value of the land and therefore, it goes without saying

that the rate of tax may be notified by the State Government

for the assessment of the tax on the basis of market value of

the land as well. Learned AAG submitted that for the

assessment of the market value for the purpose of levy of tax,

it is always open to adopt a rational basis and therefore, Rule

24 of the Rules which makes the provision for assessment of

the market value of the land on the basis of the rates

approved by DLC or the rates approved by the IG R S from

time to time whichever is higher cannot be said to be illegal or

arbitrary. Learned AAG submitted that since the tax is

permissible to be assessed under the provisions of the Act on

the market value of the land and therefore, Rule 24 of the

Rules as framed, in no manner travels beyond the scope of

provisions of Section 39 of the Act. Learned AAG submitted

that the DLC stands defined by Rule 2 (b) of Rajasthan Stamp

Rules, 1955 ( the Rules of 1955 ) and the procedure for
 22 

assessment of the market value of the property has been

prescribed under Rule 59 (B) of the Rules of 1955. It is

submitted that Rule 59 (B) of the Rules of 1955 was struck

down by this Court vide the decision rendered in the matter of

 Satyam Properties V. State [2002 (2) RLR 722], however ,

 the said decision of this Court stands set aside by the Hon ble

Supreme Court vide order dated 29.7.10 passed in the matter

of State of Rajasthan Ors. vs. Satyam Properties (Civil

Appeal No.3671-3684 of 2003) observing that the provisions

of Rule 59 (B) of the Rules of 1955 could be reconciled with

the provisions of Section 47 (A) of the Rajasthan Stamp Act,

1899 by adopting the principle of harmonious construction.

Learned AAG submitted that in view of the decision of the

Hon ble Supreme Court as aforesaid, the vires of a pari

materia provision, rather the provision which is relevant for

the assessment of market value of the land for the purpose of

levy of tax under the Act stands upheld and therefore, the

petitioners challenge to the vires of the provisions of Rule 24

(1) of the Rules also does not survive for consideration of this

Court. Learned AAG submitted that the Hon ble Supreme

Court in the matter of Satyam Properties opined that it is not

mandatory for the Registering Officer to necessarily accept in

each and every case the recommendation of the DLC and in

appropriate cases, he can disagree with the assessment of the
 23 

DLC. Learned AAG submitted that the rates of the land

recommended by DLC are revisable and liable to be increased

or decreased as per provisions of Sub Rule (2) of Rule 24 of

the Rules and therefore, by no stretch of imagination, the

provisions incorporated under Rule 24 of the Rules can be

said to be violative of Article 14 and 19 (1) (g) of the

Constitution of India. Learned AAG drawing our attention to a

Bench decision of this Court dated 4.1.01 rendered in the

matter of Vijay Raj and Ors. Vs. State of Rajsthan and Ors. 

submitted that the pari materia provision incorporated by way

of Rule 58 of the Rajasthan Stamp Rules, 2004 also stands

upheld. Learned AAG submitted that against the provisional

assessment list, the assessees have right to file objections

before the Assessing Authority and the final assessment order

is appealable and therefore, there is absolutely no reason as

to why the petitioners should be permitted to invoke extra

ordinary jurisdiction of this court under Article 226 of the

Constitution of India.
 
 19. Replying the arguments of learned counsel

Mr.M.S.Singhvi, regarding the land being held by the

petitioners Oil India Corporation Limited and the Raj West

Power Limited for the public purpose, learned AAG submitted

that sub-clause (iii) of Clause (b) of second proviso to Section

39 refers to the public purpose related with the religious
 24 

philanthropic and social purposes and it has no relation to the

land held and used for mining and industrial purposes. In

support of his contention, learned AAG has relied upon the

decisions of the Hon ble Supreme Court in H.P.Barua Ors.

v. The State of Assam Ors. , AIR 1961 SC 232, Jagir Singh

 Ors. vs. State of Bihar Anr. , AIR 1976 SC 997,

 Vemareddy Kumaraswamy Reddy Anr. v. State of A.P. ,

2006 (2) SCC 670. Lastly, learned AAG submitted that against

the provisional assessment list, the petitioners have right to

file objections before the assessing authority, and against the

final assessment order, the remedy of appeal is available to

them under Section 48 of the Act and therefore, there is

absolutely no reason as to why the petitioners should be

permitted to invoke extra-ordinary jurisdiction of this Court

under Article 226 of the Constitution of India. 

 20. Replying the arguments advanced by learned AAG, Mr.

M.S.Singhvi, learned counsel submitted that where there is

violation of the principle of natural justice, the aggrieved

person can always invoke extra-ordinary jurisdiction of this

Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India. It is

submitted that the remedy of appeal provided under Section

48 is not an efficacious alternative remedy inasmuch as under

 the said provision, no appeal can be entertained unless it is

accompanied by proof of payment of not less than one half of
 25 

the tax assessed and payable by person preferring the appeal.
 
 Learned counsel urged that the provision of appeal

incorporated being onerous, the petitioners cannot be non-
 
 suited on the ground of availability of remedy of appeal under

the relevant statute. In support of his contention, learned

counsel has relied upon a decision of the Hon ble Supreme

Court in the matter of Executive Engineer, Southern

Electricity Supply Company of Orissa Limited(Southco) v. Sri

Seetaram Rice Mills, (2012) 2 SCC, 108.
 
 21. We have considered the rival submissions, perused the

material on record and gone through the decisions cited at the

Bar.
 
 22. The levy of the land tax in the State of Rajasthan has

been a matter of litigation between the assesses and the

State for last more than two decades and, therefore, so as to

appreciate the controversy raised in these matters, a brief

reference to the history of legislation imposing land tax and

the previous litigation which had travelled right upto the

Hon ble Supreme Court would be appropriate.
 
 23. In the first instance in the year 1985, the State

Legislature enacted Rajasthan Land Tax Act, 1985 ( Act of

1985 ), which came into force w.e.f. 31.7.85, to provide for

imposition of tax on land in areas other than urban areas in

the State of Rajasthan and the matters incidental thereto. The
 26 

legislation as aforesaid was brought with the objects and

reasons that the land situate in areas other than urban areas

in the State of Rajasthan are extensively being made use of

for the purpose of excavating or extracting ores or minerals,

for growing, collecting or receiving forest or horticultural

produce or for industrial or commercial purpose. As per

 Section 3 of the Act of 1985, every land holder was liable to

pay tax under the said Act on the annual value of the land for

every year or as the case may be, part thereof during which

such land was held or used by him. The lands covered for levy

of land tax as defined under Section 2(g) of the Act of 1985,

were the land held or used for (i) excavating, extracting,

removing or utilising any ore or mineral, (ii) growing,

collecting or receiving any forest or horticultural produce; (iii)

any industrial or commercial purpose of (iv) any other

purpose, but excluding the land held or used exclusively for

agricultural or residential purpose or a land situated in an

urban area or in a notified area declared as such under

Section 313 of the Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959

(Rajasthan Act 38 of 1959) or an abadi land as defined in

Clause (b) of Section 103 of the Rajasthan Land Revenue Act,

1956 (Rajasthan Act 15 of 1956). Section 5 of the Act of 1985

dealing with the rate of tax provided that the tax payable by a

land holder shall be assessed at such rate not exceeding fifty
 27 

percent of the annual value, as may be specified by the State

Government from time to time by notification in Official

Gazette and different rates may be specified for land held or

used for different purposes.
 
 24. The vires of Act of 1985 was challenged by the mining

lease holders inter alia on the grounds that so far as it

imposes tax on land held for carrying on mining operations is

unconstitutional being beyond the legislative power of the

State inasmuch as the field has been taken over by the

Parliament by declaration made under Section 2 of the Central

Act. It was further contended that the tax, duty or royalty on

mineral and the Act has been framed by the State Legislature

in colourable exercise of the power inasmuch as it has no

power to impose tax on the production or excavation of

mineral. The validity of the Act was upheld by this Court by a

decision rendered in the matter of Mangalam Cement Ltd. v.
 
 State of Rajathan and Anr. AIR 1987 Raj. 186. The matter

was taken in appeal before the Hon ble Supreme Court which

in its turn by its decision in the matter of Federation of

Mining Association of Rajasthan v. State of Rajasthan , AIR

1992 SC 103, declared the enactment insofar as it purports to

levy of tax on mineral bearing lands as ultra vires. Relying

upon the earlier decision rendered in the matter of Orissa

Cement Limited v. State of Orissa AIR 1991 SC 1676, the
 28 

Hon ble Supreme Court held that the State Legislature did not

have the competence to legislate for levy of tax on mineral

bearing lands based on royalty derived from the land. It was

contended on behalf of the State before the Apex Court that

even if tax based on royalty amount is held to be not a tax

within the competence of the State Government, it is possible

to sever that portion of legislation and uphold the validity of

the levy based on the rent. The Hon ble Supreme Court

opined that the dead rent payable is royalty inasmuch as it

has been defined under the relevant statute as the minimum

guaranteed amount of royalty payable to the Government .

That apart, the court observed that the reference to royalty 

or dead rent whichever is higher as the basis for the tax

shows that the State Legislature has contemplated a single

integrated scheme in which both are taken into account and

compared and accordingly, the Hon ble Supreme Court held

that it is not possible to sever valid and invalid portion of the

legislation as suggested on behalf of the State Government

and therefore, the enactment to the extent indicated above

was held to be ultra vires. 
 
 25. The Act of 1985 now stands repealed by virtue of

provisions of Section 63 of the Act, which as noticed above

provides for a new scheme for levy of tax on land in the State

of Rajasthan. The vires of the Act and the Rules made
 29 

thereunder was questioned before this Court in GKW Limited

and Another v. State of Rajasthan other connected

matters , [2008 (3) WLC (Raj.)162]. It was contended on

behalf of the petitioners therein that a similar enactment i.e.

the Act of 1985 having been already struck down by the

Hon ble Apex Court in Federation of Mining Association s case

(supra), the State Legislature was not competent to bring

similar legislation with the same intention to impose tax on

minerals. It was contended that the Act is beyond the

legislative competence of the State Legislature by virtue of

entry 49 of list II of Schedule VII of the Constitution of India.

It was contended that imposition of tax on minerals by the

State Legislature is not permissible due to limitation provided

under entry no.23 and 50 of the list II of Schedule VII of the

Constitution and in view of Central Legislation of Mines and

Mineral (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957. After due

consideration of the rival submissions, a Bench of this Court

held that since the Act of 2006 does not make a reference

regarding imposition of tax on royalty or dead rent, rather

provides for tax on the land, hence it cannot be said that the

imposition of tax is on the minerals, only for the reason that

while providing the definition of land , agriculture, urban and

residential lands have been excluded. The court observed that

mere exclusion of other category of land cannot mean that it
 30 

is a taxation on minerals, because neither the provision of the

Act, nor Rules made thereunder shows that basis for the

imposition of the tax is the royalty or dead rent so as to relate

such imposition with minerals as was otherwise existing in

the previous enactment of 1985 and therefore, the contention

that it is again a tax on mineral, was not accepted. The Court

further observed that irrespective of the excavation of

minerals and payment of dead rent or royalty in terms of the

provisions of the Act, tax is payable by the land holder as

defined in the Act of 2006, thus, the enactment under

challenge having no co-relation with even excavation of the

mineral, cannot be said to be tax on mineral. While dealing

with the question raised that if the tax was to be imposed on

the land, it could be imposed only on the person owning the

land, whereas under the Act, the tax purports to be levied

even on license or lessee or even on occupier of the land, the

Court opined that the ownership is a bundle of things and the

person who is given right to occupy the land in whatever

capacity does possess some spice of that big genus of

ownership and therefore, on this count the tax cannot be

declared invalid. Accordingly, this Court held that the State

Government is having legislative competence for enactment

of Chapter-VII of the Act and the Rules framed thereunder,

therefore, the same cannot be held to be ultravires. 
 31 

 26. Suffice it to say that the vires of the Act and the Rules

framed thereunder having been upheld by a Coordinate Bench

of this Court as aforesaid, the petitioners cannot be permitted

to question the vires of the provisions of the Act and the Rules

all over again even on the additional ground. It is settled law

that every new discovery or argumentative novelty cannot

undo or compel reconsideration of a binding precedent [ vide

 Ambika Prasad Mishra v. State of U.P. , 1980(3) SCC, 719]. It

is equally well settled that if an enactment is held to be intra

vires, it is presumed that the validity of the enactment stands

examined by the court on all aspects of the matter and the

question with regard to vires cannot be reopened on any

additional or new grounds and therefore, in considered

opinion of this court, the vires of the provisions of the Act and

the Rules generally having been upheld by this court in GKW

Limited s case (supra), the petitioners cannot be permitted to

rechallenge the same. 
 
 27. But then, the fact remains that in GKW Limited s case

(supra), while upholding the vires of the Act and the Rules

framed, the vires of any specific rule being ultra vires the

provisions of the Act, was not questioned and therefore, the

Coordinate Bench had no occasion to examine the vires of

Rule 24 of the Rules as such, which is under challenge in the

present writ petitions. In this view of the matter, we consider
 32 

it appropriate to examine the questions raised regarding the

provisions of Rule 24 (1) of the Rules being ultra vires, the

provisions of the Act. 
 
 28. Indisputably, as per the charging section i.e. Section 39 

of the Act, the tax on classes of land covered by the definition

of the land as incorporated in Section 38(c) of the Act, shall

be levied at such rates, as may be specified by the State

Government from time to time in the Official Gazette. It is

true that the main provision of Section 39 does not specify

the basis for the rates of the tax to be notified, but then, first

proviso to Section 39 specifically provides that the rate of tax

under the said section shall not exceed ten percent of the

market value of the land. Thus, the conjoint reading of main

provision of Section 39 and first proviso thereto makes it

abundantly clear that apart from any other rational basis for

providing the rate of tax, it is permissible to levy the tax at

the rate specified by the State Government on the market

value of the land. It is true that it is not the legislative

mandate that the land tax under the Act is to be charged on

the market value alone but then, the levy of tax on the basis

of the market value of the land is permissible rather,

specifically recognised under the Act and therefore, by no

stretch of imagination, it can be said that while providing for

the levy of land tax on the basis of the market value of the
 33 

land by way of Rule 24(1) of the Rules, the State Government

has travelled beyond the scope of provisions of Section 39 of

the Act, in any manner.
 
 29. Obviously, when the rate of tax is notified by the State

Government on the market value of the land, some rational

method has to be adopted by the Assessing Authority to

assess the market value of the land subjected to tax. As per

Rule 24(1) of the Rules the market value of the land shall be

assessed by the Assessing Authority on the basis of the rates

recommended by the DLC or the rates approved by the IG

R S from time to time whichever is higher. The DLC has been

defined to mean the committee constituted by the State

Government for a district, from time to time under Rajasthan

Stamp Rules, 2004, for the purpose of determining the

market value of the land. As laid down by a Coordinate Bench

of this Court in GKW Limited s case (supra), the tax imposed

under the Act is essentially the tax on the land and, therefore,

for assessment of the market value of the land, the provision

made by incorporation in terms of the provisions of Rule 24 of

the Rules, applying the rates recommended by the DLC under

the provisions of Rajasthan Stamp Rules, 2004, cannot be

faulted with. 
 
 30. The contention of the learned counsel for the petitioners

that the stamp duty on the mining lease granted for a period
 34 

upto twenty years is payable in terms of provisions of

 Rajasthan Stamp Act, 1998 on a consideration equivalent to

the amount or value of average rent of two years and

therefore, the DLC constituted under Rule 2(b) of Rajasthan

Stamp Rules, 2004 or the IG R S have no occasion to

recommend the market value of the land held for mining

purposes, is also devoid of any merit. The fact that the land

subjected to tax is a mineral bearing land may be relevant for

assessing its market value but then, on that account the

criteria laid down for assessement of market value of the land

on the basis of the DLC rate notified cannot be held to be

illegal or arbitrary. It is pertinent to note that before framing

of the Rajasthan Stamp Rules, 2004, the procedure for

assessment of market value of immovable property by

Registering Officer for the purpose of levy of stamp duty was

governed by Rule 59B of the Rajasthan Stamp Rules, 1955

( Rules of 1955 ). The validity of the said Rule was

assailed before this court in the matter of Satyam

Properties s case (supra), wherein Rule 59B of the Rules of

1955 was held to be ultra vires Section 47 A(2) of the Indian

Stamp Act, 1899 as adapted in Rajasthan under the Rajasthan

Stamp Law (Adaptation) Act, 1952. However, the matter was

taken in appeal (Civil Appeal No.3671-3684 of 2003 State of

Rajasthan v. Satyam Properties ) before the Hon ble Supreme
 35 

Court. The Hon ble Supreme Court allowed the appeal filed by

the State of Rajasthan and while setting aside the decision of

this court, declared Rule 59B of the Rules of 1955 as intra

vires. The order passed by the Hon ble Supreme Court reads

as under:
 
 Heard the learned counsel for the appellants.
 Although the respondent has been duly served, none
 appeared therefor.
 The short question in this case is whether Rule 59(B)
 of the Rajasthan Stamp Rules, 1955 ( for short the
 Rules ) is ultra vires Section 47A of the Rajasthan
 Stamp Act, 1899( for short the Act ).
 The High Court has held Rule 59(B) of the Rules to
 be ultra vires and hence, this Appeal.
 Rule 59(B) of the Rules reads as under:-
 
 59(B) Procedure for assessment of the market
 value of the property by the Registering Officer-(1)
 In the case of an instrument relating to immovable
 property, the market value of land shall be
 assessed by the Registering Officer on the basis of
 the rates recommended by the District Level
 Committee constituted under Rule 2(j) from time
 to time ordered the rates approved by the
 Inspector General of Stamps from time to time,
 whichever is higher and market value of the
 constituted portion shall be assessed on the basis
 of the rates determined by the State Government
 from time to time.
 (2) If the rates of land recommended by the
 District Level Committee are not revised within one
 years from the date of such recommendation
 ordered if the market value of the land in any area
 as extra ordinarily increased or decreased, the
 State Government may suo-motu or on a reference
 made by the Inspector General of Stamps re-
 determine by order the rates of the land in such
 areas on the basis of the recommendation made by
 a committee consisting of SSF(Revenue) as
 chairman and Inspector General of Stamps, D.S.F.
 (Tax), Collector of concerned District and a Public
 Representative of that District nominated by the
 36 

Government as member. The rates so determined
shall be the market value of that area and be the
basis of assessment of the market value of the land
with effect from the date specified in such order
and be valid till the District Level Committee
revises the rates do determined. 
 
 Section 47A of the Act is as under:-
 
 47A. Instruments under valued, how to be
values(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in
the Registration Act, 1908 (Central Act XVI of
1908) and the Rules made thereunder as in force
in Rajasthan where, in the case of any instrument
relating to an immovable property chargeable with
an ad valorem duty on the market value of the
property as set forth in the instrument, the
registering officer has, while registering the
instrument, reasons to believe that the market
value of the property has not been truly set forth
in the instrument, he may (either before or after
registering) sent it in original to the Collector for
determination of the market value and to assess
and charge the duty in conformity with such
determination together with a penalty not
exceeding 10 times of the deficient stamp duty
chargeable and surcharge, if any, payable on such
instrument.
 (2) On receipt of the instrument under sub-
 section (1), the Collector shall, after giving the
parties a reasonable opportunity of being heard
and after holding an enquiry in the prescribed
manner determine the market value and duty
including the penalty and surcharge, if any,
payable thereon and if the amount of duty
including penalty and surcharge, if any, already
paid, the deficient amount shall be payable by the
person liable to pay the duty including penalty and
surcharge, if any. 
 
 It is a well settled principle of interpretation
that the Court should try to uphold the validity of a
provision unless it is clearly ultra vires. In our
opinion, we can re-concile Rule 59(B) of the Rules
with Section 47A of the Act by adopting the
principle of harmonious construction.
 Section 47A of the Act is a provision in the
 37 

 statute, whereas Rule 59(B) of the Rule is only a
 piece of delegated legislation. In our opinion, we
 can harmonise the two provisions quoted herein
 above by holding that the assessment determined
 under the Rules by the District Level Committee
 ( which is commonly known as circle rate ) shall
 not prevent the Registering Officer from making a
 reference under Section 47A of the Act to the
 Collector in case the Registering Officer, prima
 facie, is of the opinion that the real market value
 of the property is far above the circle rate so
 determined by the District Level Committee.
 In our opinion, this is the only harmonious
 construction possible because obviously Rules
 cannot render nugatory the provisions of the Act.
 Hence, it is not mandatory for the Registering
 Officer to necessarily accept in every case the
 recommendations of the District Level Committee.
 In an appropriate case and in certain situation, the
 Registering Officer can disagree with the
 assessment determined by the District Level
 Committee and refer the matter to the Collector
 under Section 47A of the Act.
 Hence, we set aside the judgment of the
 High Court. The Appeals are disposed of
 accordingly. No costs. (emphasis added)

 31. Relying upon the decision of the Hon ble Supreme Court

in Stayam Properties s case (supra), Rule 58 of the Rajasthan

Stamp Rules, 2004 providing for the procedure for

assessment of the market value of the immovable property,

has also been held to be intra vires and constitutionally valid

by a Bench of this court in Vijay Raj s case (supra). Thus, for

the parity of reasons, the vires of provision incorporated

under Rule 24(1) of the Rules providing for assessment of

market value of the land on the basis of the DLC rate or the

rates determined by the IG R S, whichever is higher, cannot
 38 

also deserves to be upheld. 
 
 32. The Rule 24(1) as framed by the State Government for

the purpose of assessment of tax on market value of the land

in no manner enlarges the scope or renders the provisions of

 Section 39 of the Act nugatory whereunder it is permissible to

levy the tax on the market value of the land. To put in other

words, the authority of the State Government to levy the tax

on land even on the basis of its market value stands pre-

determined by Section 39 of the Act, the rule framed as

aforesaid neither enlarges nor restricts the authority, it only

regulates the assessment part of the same. As observed by

the Hon ble Supreme Court in Satyam Properties s case

(supra), in appropriate case in certain situation, the

Registering Officer may disagree with the DLC rate

determined and therefore, if the market value of the land

assessed applying DLC rates is found to be excessive by the

petitioners in a given case, they are not precluded from

questioning the assessment of market value of the land made

by the Assessing Authority on available grounds in accordance

with law. Thus, viewed from any angle, the provisions of Rule

24(1) of the Rules providing for the assessment of market

value of the land for the purpose of levy of tax under the Act

cannot be held to be ultra vires the rule making powers of the

State Government under the Act. 
 39 

 33. Coming to the contention raised by Mr. B.L. Purohit,

Senior Advocate that the right conferred upon the petitioner

by way of mining lease is right in sub soil area mentioned in

lease with no right on surface of the land and, therefore, the

mining lease holder being not the owner of the land, no tax

can be levied on the land held by them for mining purposes

inasmuch as the tax is essentially on the land and not the sub

soil area thereof, it is relevant to note that the land which is

amenable to tax, stands defined by Section 38(c) which as

noticed above is couched in negative terms inasmuch as it

excludes certain classes of the land from the ambit of levy of

tax under the Act and therefore, all other lands which are not

specifically excluded, the land holders thereof could always be

brought within the tax net in terms of the provisions of the

Act. Indisputably, the mineral bearing land held by the land

holders is not excluded from the purview of the land 

amenable to tax as defined by Section 38(c) of the Act. That

apart, the land holder as defined by Section 38(d) is a

person who holds or uses the land as its owner, tenant,

lessee, licensee, grantee or under any right or contract or in

any other capacity. Needless to say that the definition of the

 land holder incorporated as aforesaid is very wide and it

includes all the land holders in whatever capacity they are

holding the land amenable to tax under the Act. As a matter
 40 

of fact, in terms of the definition of land and land holder 

incorporated as aforesaid, the use of the land for any specific

purpose is not of any relevance, therefore, the contention of

the petitioners that they are holding the land for mining

purposes and thus are having the rights only in sub soil area

of the land in no manner takes them out from tax net in

terms of provisions of Section 39 of the Act. As observed by a

Coordinate Bench in GKW Limited s case (supra), irrespective

of the excavation of minerals and payment of dead rent of

royalty, the tax is payable by the land holders as defined in

the Act. Thus, the petitioners, alleged to be mining lease

holders, having right only in sub soil area of the land i.e. right

to excavate the minerals from the land with no surface

rights, are admittedly holding the land as land holders in

terms of the provisions of Section 38(d) of the Act and

therefore, in no manner can claim exemption from the

payment of tax under under the Act. 
 
 34. In view of the discussion above, the decisions cited by

the learned counsel Mr. B.L.Purohit regarding the strict

construction of fiscal statute do not help the petitioners in any

manner.
 
 35. The contention of Mr. B.L.Purohit, Senior Advocate that

the marketability of the land is pre requisite for levy of tax

under the Act and therefore, the Assessing Authority is
 41 

required to first decide the question whether the lands of

which market value is to be determined is marketable, to say

the least, is devoid of any substance. From the plain reading

of the provisions of the Act , it is manifestly clear that the tax

is to be levied essentially on the lands covered by Section 38

 (c) held by the land holders and defined by Section 38(d) of

the Act. As noticed above, the assessment of the tax on the

basis of the market value of the land is permissible under the

Act and market value of the land bearing minerals can always

be assessed by the Assessing Authority in accordance with the

procedure laid down. As a matter of fact, the concept of

marketability of the goods sought to be introduced by the

learned counsel in respect of levy of tax on the lands as

defined by Section 38(c) of the Act, has no bearing in the

instant case.
 
 36. This takes us to consider the contention of learned

counsel Mr. M.S. Singhvi, Senior Advocate that the

petitioners, Oil India Corporation and Raj West Power Project,

engaged in exploration of crude oil and generation of

electricity respectively, are holding the land for the public

purpose and, therefore, the land held by them stands

exempted from levy of tax under the Act by virtue of clause

 (b)(iii) of second proviso to Section 39 of the Act.

 37. It is settled law that exemption clause in a taxing
 42 

statute should be construed strictly but once the subject

matter of the tax satisfy the test as laid down under

exemption clause, the same needs to be construed liberally so

as to allow the exemption instead of denying it. In Bombay

Chemical s case (supra) relied upon by the learned counsel,

the Hon ble Supreme Court observed: 
 
 .....xxxx....One of the settled principles of construction
 of an exemption notification is that it should be construed
 strictly, but once a goods is found to satisfy the test by
 which it falls in the exemption notification then it cannot
 be excluded from it by resorting to applying or construing
 such notification narrowly. 
 
 38. At this stage, it would be appropriate to refer to the

decisions cited by the learned counsel in support of the

contention that the lands held by said companies for the

public purpose specified falls within the definition of public

purpose in terms of clause (b)(iii) of second proviso to

 Section 39 of the Act.
 
 39. In Ranganatha Reddy s case (supra), the Hon ble Apex

Court observed: 
 
 64. It is right to remember, what has been mentioned
 in Shri Justice Das judgment, that modern conditions
 and the increasing inter-dependence of the different
 human factors in the progressive complexity of the
 community make it necessary for the government to
 touch upon and limit individual activities at more points
 than formerly. In Corpus Juris the meaning of the
 terms is stated to be flexible and varying with time and
 circumstances. All that can be said that it embraces
 public utility, public advantage, public interest or
 object.
 43 

 It is thus quite clear that a fresh outlook which places the general
 interest of the community above the interest of the individual
 pervades our Constitution.....The words public purpose used in
 Article 23(2) indicate that the Constitution used those words in a
 very large sense. In the never ending race, the law must keep pace
 with the realities of the social and political evolution of the country
 as reflected in the Constitution. If, therefore, the State has to give
 effect to this avowed purpose of our Constitution, we must regard as
 public purpose all that will be calculated to promote the welfare of
 the people as envisaged in these Directive Principles of State Policy
 whatever else that express may mean.
 
 This new outlook, in the words of Das,J., brings in
 economic justice regarded yesterday as a fantastic
 formula, but is today a directive principle of State policy. 
 
 40. In Pratibha Nema s case (supra), the Hon ble Supreme

Court while dealing with distinction between the acquisition of

the land for public purpose and the acquisition under Chapter

VII of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 , observed: 

 22. Thus the distinction between public purpose
 acquisition and Part VII acquisition has got blurred under
 the impact of judicial interpretation of relevant
 provisions. The main and perhaps the decisive distinction
 lies in the fact whether the cost of acquisition comes out
 of public funds wholly or partly. Here again, even a
 token or nominal contribution by the Government was
 held to be sufficient compliance with the second proviso
 to Section 6 as held in a catena of decisions. The next
 result is that by contributing even a trifling sum, the
 character and pattern of acquisition could be changed by
 the Government. In ultimate analysis, what is considered
 to be an acquisition for facilitating the setting up of an
 industry in the private sector could get imbued with the
 character of public purpose acquisition if only the
 Government comes forward to sanction the payment of a
 nominal sum towards compensation. In the present state
 of law, that seems to be the real position. 
 
 41. In Fomento Resorts and Hotels Limited s case (supra),

the Hon ble Supreme Court held that acquisition of land for

tourism development project is certainly for a public purpose
 44 

inasmuch as, a huge amount of foreign exchange is generated

by this industry apart from providing employment and

anciliary benefits to a large section of population of State. 

 42. In Soora Ram Pratap Reddy s case (supra), the Hon ble

Apex Court observed:
 
 67.The expression public purpose is of very wide
 amplitude. It is merely illustrative and not exhaustive.
 The inclusive definition does not restrict its ambit and
 scope. Really, the expression is incapable of precise and
 comprehensive definition. And it is neither desirable nor
 advisable to attempt to define it. It is used in a generic
 sense of including any purpose wherein even a fraction
 of the community may be interested or by which it may
 be benefited. 
 


 43. Adverting to the facts of the case it is pertinent to note

that the lands held by the petitioners were acquired by the

State Government for the public purpose. According to the

learned counsel the land were acquired for the purpose of

establishing the industrial units for exploration of the crude oil

and generation of the electricity which falls within the

definition of public purpose . It is pertinent to note that the

 public purpose as defined by Section 3(f) of the Land

Acquisition Act, 1894 ( the Act of 1894 ) does not include

within its ambit the industries set up for production of

particular commodity of the public utility. But then, by virtue

of provisions of sub-section (3) of Section 6 of the Act of

1894, the declaration issued under Section 6(1) of the Act of
 45 

1894 is treated to be conclusive evidence that the land is

needed for a public purpose or for a company as the case may

be. Thus, insofar as the acquisition of the land for the

petitioners companies is concerned, the same has to be

treated to be acquired for the public purpose. But then, the

acquisition of the land for public purposes in terms of

provisions of Act of 1894 cannot be given the same meaning

under the other statutes which do not deal with cognate

subjects. The acquisition of the land for the purpose of

establishment of a particular industry may be in the larger

public interest but then this does not lead to the conclusion

that the land is held by the industries so established for the

public purpose. In other words, the exploration of crude oil

and generation of the electricity to cater the need of public at

large may be the public purpose but then this fact cannot be

lost sight of that the petitioner companies works on the

business principle for profit and gain and, therefore, for all

intent and purposes they cannot be said to be operating their

business for the public purpose as such. In considered opinion

of this Court, the public purpose as mentioned in clause (b)

 (iii) of proviso to Section 39, cannot be given such wider

meaning so as to include such industrial establishments within

its ambit, which though engaged in production of the

commodities of the public utility, works for profits and gains.
 46 

It is settled principle of construction that the meaning of the

words and expression used must be interpretated in context

of the statute and not by reference to its use in another

statute and therefore, the expression public purpsoe in

context of the land acquisition proceedings under the Land

Acquisition Act, 1894 , cannot be given same meaning and

cannot be taken as guide for interpretation of the similar

expression used in clause (b)(iii) of second proviso to Section

39 of the Act. In considered opinion of this Court, the

exemption clause incorporated as aforesaid in the context of

the Act indicates that the public purpose as mentioned under

the said clause refers to only the land held exclusively for the

public purpose i.e. the land put to use for the public at large

and no other lands. Thus, merely because the lands held by

the petitioners were acquired under the provisions of the Act

of 1894 for the public purpose, it cannot be said that the

petitioners are holding and using the land for public purposes

within the meaning of clause (b)(iii) of proviso to Section 39 

of the Act and, therefore, the petitioners are not entitled to

claim exemption from the payment of tax under the Act.

 44. Lastly coming to the grievances raised by the petitioners

in respect of the procedure being adopted by the Assessing

Authority while assessing the tax under the Act, it is to be

noticed that as per provisions of Section 40 of the Act in the
 47 

first instance, the Assessing Authority is required to prepare

and cause to be prepared in such manner and containing such

particulars, as may be prescribed a provisional assessment list

of all lands liable to pay the tax. After preparing the

provisional list, the Assessing Authority is under an obligation

to issue a public notice of the same in the manner and

containing such particular as may be prescribed and every

person claiming to be land holder of the land mentioned in the

list are at liberty to inspect the same and take extract

therefrom without payment of any charge. In terms of Section

41 of the Act any person aggrieved by the entry in the

provisional assessment list or by insertion therein or omission

therefrom of any matter, are entitled to raise objections

within thirty days from the date on which the list is made

available for inspection. The Assessing Authority has the

discretion to entertain the objections even beyond the period

of thirty days if he is satisfied that the objector was prevented

for sufficient cause from filling the objections within the

aforesaid period. By virtue of provision of sub-section (2) of

 Section 42 , the Assessing Authority is under an obligation to

afford an opportunity being heard and producing evidence to

the objector before deciding the objections. Further, the final

assessment order passed by the Assessing Authority under

 Section 42 , 43 or 44 is appealable before the Appellate
 48 

Authority. That apart, by virtue of provisions of Section 51 of

the Act, the State Government or such other authority as

may be appointed by it in this behalf is empowered to

exercise the revisional power on its own motion or on an

application made.
 
 45. Thus, the right of land holder to object the liability of

tax and the right to challenge the same by availing

appropriate remedy before the authority concerned is

specifically provided for under the relevant statute and,

therefore, there is absolutely no reason as to why the

petitioners should be permitted to invoke the extraordinary

jurisdiction of this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution

of India. Needless to say the Assessing Authority, the

Appellate Authority or the Revisional Authority are vested with

the power to decide the question of law as well and if the

lands held by the petitioners are not liable to tax under the

Act, then it is always open for them to agitate such questions

before the Assessing Aurthority and the Appellate Authority in

accordance with law.
 
 46. The contention of learned counsel for the petitioners

that the remedy provided under the relevant statute is

onerous inasmuch as it provides for deposit of one half of the

tax assessed and payable by the person prefering the appeal

as the condition precedent and, therefore, the remedy
 49 

provided is not efficacious, to say the least, is absolutely

devoid of any merit. It is settled law that the right to appeal

is a creation of statute and it can always be circumscribed by

the conditions for exercise of the right. It is pertinent to note

that the proviso to Section 48 (1) of the Act does not provide

for the deposit of the entire amount due but only one half of

the tax assessed. It does not even include any other part of

the demand such as interest or penalty. In this view of the

matter, this court is of the considrered opinon that the

condition of pre-deposit provided for exercise of the right to

appeal, cannot be said to be onerous.
 
 47. In view of the discussion above, since the effective and

efficacious remedy of appeal is available to the petitioners

under the relevant statute, they cannot be permitted to

invoke the extra ordinary jurisdiction of this court to assail the

validity of provisional/final assessment order passed by the

Assessing Authority and therefore, we are not inclined to

consider the other submissions made by the learned counsel

for the petitioners regarding the the fairness of the procedure

adopted during the assessment proceedings and other

anciliary questions raised as aforesaid. However, on the facts

and in the circumstances of the case, we are of the opinion

that the petitioners deserve to be granted reasonable time to

submit their objections before the Assessing Authority against
 50 

 the provisional assessment list or for filing an appeal before

 the Appellate Authority in accordance with law.

 48. In the result, the challenge to the vires of provisions of

 Section 38(c) 39 of the Act and Rule 24(1) of the Rules

 fails. The writ petitions are dismissed. However, the

 petitioners, if aggrieved by the entry made in the provisional

 assessment list, shall be at liberty to file the appropriate

 objections before the Assessing Authority and in the matters

 wherein final assessment orders have already been made and

 demands have been created, they shall be at liberty to file an

 appeal before the Appellate Authority, if not already filed,

 within a period of thirty days from the date of this order. The

 amount, if any, deposited by the petitioners against the

 demand created in terms of interim orders passed by this

 Court or otherwise, shall be adjusted against the amount

 payable so as to satisfy the condition of pre-deposit for

 maintainability of appeal. Needless to say that the deficit

 amount, if any, required to be deposited for entertaining the

 appeal by the Appellate Authority, the same shall be

 deposited by the petitioners within the stipulated period. No

 order to costs.
 
 

 (SANGEET LODHA),J. (ARUN MISHRA),C.J.
Aditya/-
 51 


 All corrections made in the judgment/order have been incorporated in the judgment/order being emailed.



 Aditya Joshi, PS