Ramesh Chand vs Uttar Haryana Bijli Vitran Nigam Ltd. ... on 19 January, 2016 

 Author: Rakesh Kumar Jain 

 Bench: Rakesh Kumar Jain 

 KUMAR MANOJ
 I attest to the accuracy and
 integrity of this document

 IN THE HIGH COURT FOR THE STATES OF PUNJAB AND
 HARYANA AT CHANDIGARH

1. CWP No.13209 of 2013
Ramesh Chand
 ....Petitioner
 Versus
Uttar Haryana Bijli Vitran Nigam Limited and Ors.
 ...Respondents
 And
2. CWP No.22308 of 2013
Surinder Kumar
 ....Petitioner
 Versus
Uttar Haryana Bijli Vitran Nigam Limited and Ors.
 ...Respondents
 And

3. CWP No.23592 of 2013

Narender Kumar Singhal
 ....Petitioner
 Versus
Uttar Haryana Bijli Vitran Nigam Limited and Ors.
 ...Respondents
 And
4. CWP No.2749 of 2014
Kashmir Singh
 ....Petitioner
 Versus
Uttar Haryana Bijli Vitran Nigam Limited and Ors.
 ...Respondents
 And

5. CWP No.808 of 2014

Ram Rattan Sharma
 ....Petitioner
 Versus
Uttar Haryana Bijli Vitran Nigam Limited and Ors.
 ...Respondents

 Date of Order: 19.01.2016

CORAM: HON BLE MR. JUSTICE RAKESH KUMAR JAIN

Present: Mr. J.K. Goel, Advocate for the petitioner(s).
 (for the petitioner in CWP No.13209/2013).

 Mr. Arvind Bansal, Advocate for

 Mr. Siddharth Gulati, Advocate for the petitioner(s).
 (in CWP No.808/2014).

 Mr. Rajinder Goyal, Advocate for the petitioner (s).
 (in CWP No.2749/2014 and CWP No.23592 of 2013).

 Mr. Arvind Kashyap, Advocate for the petitioner (s).
 (in CWP No.22308/2013).

 Mr. P.S. Poonia, Advocate for the respondents.

RAKESH KUMAR JAIN, J (ORAL)
 
 This order shall dispose of aforesaid five writ petitions

bearing CWP No.13209 of 2013, CWP No.22308 of 2013, CWP

No.23592 of 2013, CWP No.2749 of 2014 and CWP No.808 of

2014 as the issue involved in all is the same. However, for the

sake of convenience, the facts are being extracted from CWP

No.13209 of 2013.
 
 In short, the petitioner has challenged the order dated

28.05.2013 (Annexure P.3) purported to have been passed as

final order of assessment in terms of Section 125 of the Electricity

Act, 2003 (for brevity the Act ) and the notice of the same date,

which has been issued under Section 135 read with Section 152 

of the Act, asking the petitioner to compound the offence, if he so

desires.
 
 Learned counsel for the petitioner has submitted that

in the case of a suspected theft, the respondent is obliged to

issue a show cause notice whereas in this case, no show cause

notice was issued to the petitioner. In this regard, he has relied

upon Instructions/Circular No.54/2007 issued by the

respondent-Corporation. It is argued that the assessment made

by the respondents of the amount of `11,66,650/- under Section

135 of the Act is in violation of Section 154 (5) of the Act as

according to him, assessment could have been made only by the

Special Court, which is constituted under Section 153 of the Act.

It is further submitted that the remedy of compounding is still

available to the petitioner even if he has been held guilty by the

Special Court of committing the theft of electricity. It is alleged

that the assessment of the amount to be paid by the petitioner

has to be in terms of Section 126 of the Act and that too after

giving show cause notice to the petitioner but in the present

case, no formula has been disclosed by the respondents as to on

what basis, the assessment has been made of the amount of

`11,66,650/-.
 
 Learned counsel for the respondents has submitted

that Sections 126 and 135 of the Act operate in different fields as

 Section 126 deals with over-consumption of the electricity

whereas Section 135 of the Act deals with the theft of electricity.

It is further submitted that even in the case of theft of electricity,

there are two situations, firstly where theft is writ large and

secondly where the theft is suspected. It is argued that in case

of theft of electricity, where it is writ large, no opportunity of

hearing is required to be given but where it is suspected,

opportunity of hearing is given as provided in the

Instruction/Circular No.54 of 2007. It is also contended that

before the consumer is proceeded against, in terms of the Code

of Criminal Procedure , 1973, before the Special Court, which has

jurisdiction to impose both physical and fiscal punishment i.e the

imprisonment and also the fine, determining the civil liability of

the consumer, opportunity is given to the consumer to

compound the offence as per provisions of Section 152 of the

Act. It is further submitted that in the case of the petitioner, the

assessment has been made of the amount in terms of Section 135 

read with Section 154 (5) of the Act and notice was given to him

for compounding the offence under Section 152 of the Act as per

formula provided in that provision.
 
 Learned counsel for the petitioner has relied upon a

decision of Hon ble Supreme Court in the case of Executive

Engineer, Southern Electricity Supply Company of Orissa

Limited (Southco) and Another Vs. Sri Seetaram Rice Mill,

(2012) 2 Supreme Court Cases 108. He has also relied upon a

Division Bench judgment of Patna High Court reported as

 Mosmat Swaran @ Swaran Manraw Vs. The State of Bihar ,

2012 (6) RCR (Criminal) 2422. 
 
 Shri Rajinder Goyal, learned counsel appearing for

the petitioner in CWP No.23592 of 2013 has argued that the

respondents have themselves attached the proforma, in the case

of assessment of the charges to be paid, in case of theft, under

 Section 135 of the Act in which a provision of opportunity of

hearing is also there whereas in his case, no opportunity of

hearing was given before assessment.
 
 In this regard, learned counsel for the respondents

has submitted that as per the checking report, the petitioner has

been found committing theft of electricity directly from the Pole,

therefore, it was not a case of suspected theft, rather it was a

case of theft, which was writ large, therefore, there is no

question of providing him opportunity of hearing and in this

regard, learned counsel for the respondents has also referred to

the Annexure attached with the reply, where, in the case of

suspected theft, provision for opportunity of hearing is there.

 I have heard learned counsel for the parties and

examined the record.
 
 From the facts and circumstances narrated

hereinabove, questions involve in this case, which require

adjudication, are as under:
 
 (i) Whether in case of theft, the consumer

 requires an opportunity of hearing or opportunity

 of hearing is only given in the case of suspected

 theft?
 
 (ii) Whether the assessment under Section 135 of

 the Act has to be carried out in terms of Section 126 

 of the Act or in terms of Section 154 (5) of the Act as

 has been done by the respondents in this case?
 
 In order to answer the aforesaid questions, it would

be relevant to refer to Sections 126 , 135 , 152 and 154 of the Act,

which read thus:
 
 126. Assessment.-(1) If on an inspection of any place or
 premises or after inspection of the equipments, gadgets,
 machines, devices found connected or used, or after

 inspection of records maintained by any person, the
 assessing officer comes to the conclusion that such person
 is indulging in unauthorized use of electricity, he shall
 provisionally assess to the best of his judgement the
 electricity charges payable by such person or by any other
 person benefited by such use.
 (2) The order of provisional assessment shall be served
 upon the person in occupation or possession or in charge
 of the place or premises in such manner as may be
 prescribed.
 (3) The person, on whom an order has been served under
 subsection (2) shall be entitled to file objections, if any,
 against the provisional assessment before the assessing
 officer, who shall, after affording a reasonable opportunity
 of hearing to such person, pass a final order of assessment
 within 30 days from the date of service of such order of
 provisional assessment, of the electricity charges payable
 by such person.
 (4) Any person served with the order of provisional
 assessment, may, accept such assessment and deposit the
 assessed amount with the licensee within seven days of
 service of such provisional assessment order upon him.
 (5) If the assessing officer reaches to the conclusion that
 unauthorised use of electricity has taken place, the
 assessment shall be made for the entire period during
 which such unauthorised use of electricity has taken place
 and if, however, the period during which such
 unauthorized use of electricity has taken place cannot be
 ascertained, such period shall be limited to a period of
 twelve months immediately preceding the date of
 inspection.
 (6) The assessment under this section shall be made at a
 rate equal to twice the tariff rates applicable for the
 relevant category of services specified in sub-section (5).
 Explanation.- For the purposes of this section,-
 (a) assessing officer means an officer of a State
 Government or Board or licensee, as the case may be,
 designated as such by the State Government;
 (b) unauthorised use of electricity means the usage of

 electricity -
 (i) by any artificial means; or
 (ii) by a means not authorised by the concerned person
 or authority or licensee; or
 (iii) through a tampered meter; or
 (iv) for the purpose other than for which the usage of
 electricity was authorised; or
 (v) for the premises or areas other than those for which
 the supply of electricity was authorised.
 135. Theft of electricity.- (1) Whoever, dishonestly, --
 (a) taps, makes or causes to be made any connection with
 overhead, underground or under water lines or cables, or
 service wires, or service facilities of a licensee or supplier,
 as the case may be; or
 (b) tampers a meter, installs or uses a tampered meter,
 current reversing transformer, loop connection or any
 other device or method which interferes with accurate or
 proper registration, calibration or metering of electric
 current or otherwise results in a manner whereby
 electricity is stolen or wasted; or
 (c) damages or destroys an electric meter, apparatus,
 equipment, or wire or causes or allows any of them to be
 so damaged or destroyed as to interfere with the proper or
 accurate metering of electricity: or
 (d) uses electricity through a tampered meter; or
 (e) uses electricity for the purpose other than for which
 the usage of electricity was authorised,
 so as to abstract or consume or use electricity shall be
 punishable with imprisonment for a term which may
 extend to three years or with fine or with both;
 Provided that in a case where the load abstracted,
 consumed, or used or attempted abstraction or
 attempted consumption or attempted use -
 (i) does not exceed 10 kilowatt, the fine imposed on first
 conviction shall not be less than three times the financial
 gain on account of such theft of electricity and in the event
 of second or subsequent conviction the fine imposed shall
 not be less than six times the financial gain on account of
 such theft of electricity;

 (ii) exceeds 10 kilowatt, the fine imposed on first
 conviction shall not be less than three times the financial
 gain on account of such theft of electricity and in the event
 of second or subsequent conviction, the sentence shall be
 imprisonment for a term not less than six months but which
 may extend to five years and with fine not less than six
 times the financial gain on account of such theft of
 electricity:
 Provided further that in the event of second and
 subsequent conviction of a person where the load
 abstracted, consumed, or used or attempted
 abstraction or attempted consumption or attempted
 use exceeds 10 kilowatt, such person shall also be
 debarred from getting any supply of electricity for a
 period which shall not be less than three months but
 may extend to two years and shall also be debarred
 from getting supply of electricity for that period from
 any other source or generating station:
 Provided also that if it is proved that any artificial
 means or means not authorized by the Board or
 licensee or supplier as the case may be, exist for the
 abstraction, consumption or use of electricity by the
 consumer, it shall be presumed, until the contrary is
 proved, that any abstraction, consumption or use of
 electricity has been dishonestly caused by such
 consumer.
 (1A) Without prejudice to the provisions of this Act, the
 licensee or supplier, as the case may be, may, upon
 detection of such theft of electricity, immediately
 disconnect the supply of electricity:
 Provided that only such officer of the licensee or
 supplier, as authorised for the purpose by the
 Appropriate Commission or any other officer of the
 licensee or supplier, as the case may be, of the rank
 higher than the rank so authorised shall disconnect the
 supply line of electricity:
 Provided further that such officer of the licensee or
 supplier, as the case may be, shall lodge a complaint
 in writing relating to the commission of such offence in

 police station having jurisdiction within twenty four
 hour from the time of such disconnect:
 Provided also that the licensee or supplier, as the case
 may be, on deposit or payment of the assessed amount
 or electricity charges in accordance with the
 provisions of this Act, shall, without prejudice to the
 obligation to lodge the complaint as referred to in the
 second proviso to this clause, restore the supply line of
 electricity within forty-eight hours of such deposit or
 payment;
 (2) Any officer of the licensee or supplier as the case may
 be, authorized in this behalf by the State Government may
 (a) enter, inspect, break open and search any place or
 premises in which he has reason to believe that
 electricity [has been or is being] used unauthorisedly;
 (b) search, seize and remove all such devices,
 instruments, wires and any other facilitator or article
 which [has been or is being], used for unauthorized use
 of electricity;
 (c) examine or seize any books of account or documents
 which in his opinion shall be useful for or relevant to, any
 proceedings in respect of the offence under sub-section
 (1) and allow the person from whose custody such books
 of account or documents are seized to make copies
 thereof or take extracts therefrom in his presence.
 (3) The occupant of the place of search or any person on
 his behalf shall remain present during the search and a list
 of all things seized in the course of such search shall be
 prepared and delivered to such occupant or person who
 shall sign the list:
 Provided that no inspection, search and seizure of
 any domestic places or domestic premises shall be
 carried out between sunset and sunrise except in the
 presence of an adult male member occupying such
 premises.
 (4) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure ,
 1973, relating to search and seizure shall apply, as far as
 may be, to searches and seizure under this Act.
 152. Compounding of offences.- (1) Notwithstanding

 anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure 
 1973, the Appropriate Government or any officer
 authorized by it in this behalf may accept from any
 consumer or person who committed or who is reasonably
 suspected of having committed an offence of theft of
 electricity punishable under this Act, a sum of money by
 way of compounding of the offence as specified in the
 Table below:
 TABLE
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Nature of Service Rate at which the sum of money for
 Compounding to be collected per
 Kilowatt(KW)/Horse Power(HP) or
 part thereof for Low Tension (LT)
 supply and per Kilo Volt Ampere
 (KVA) of contracted demand for
 High Tension (HT)
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 (1) (2)
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 1. Industrial Service twenty thousand rupees;
 2. Commercial Service ten thousand rupees;
 3. Agricultural Service two thousand rupees;
 4. Other Services four thousand rupees:
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Provided that the Appropriate Government may,
 by notification in the Official Gazette, amend the
 rates specified in the Table above.
 (2) On payment of the sum of money in accordance with
 sub-section (1), any person in custody in connection
 with that offence shall be set at liberty and no
 proceedings shall be instituted or continued against
 such consumer or person in any criminal court.
 (3) The acceptance of the sum of money for
 compounding an offence in accordance with sub-section (1) by the Appropriate Government or an officer
 empowered in this behalf shall be deemed to amount to
 an acquittal within the meaning of section 300 of the
 Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
 (4) The Compounding of an offence under sub-section
 (1) shall be allowed only once for any person or
 consumer.
 154. Procedure and power of Special Court.-(1)
 Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of

 Criminal Procedure, 1973, every offence punishable
 under sections 135 to 140 and Section 150 shall be triable
 only by the Special Court within whose jurisdiction such
 offence has been committed.
 (2) Where it appears to any court in the course of any
 inquiry or trial that an offence punishable under sections
 135 to 140 and Section 150 in respect of any offence that
 the case is one which is triable by a Special Court
 constituted under this Act for the area in which such case
 has arisen, it shall transfer such case to such Special
 Court, and thereupon such case shall be tried and
 disposed of by such Special Court in accordance with the
 provisions of this Act :
 Provided that it shall be lawful for such Special
 Court to act on the evidence, if any, recorded by
 any court in the case of presence of the accused
 before the transfer of the case to any Special Court

 Provided further that if such Special Court is of
 opinion that further examination, cross-examination and re-examination of any of the
 witnesses whose evidence has already been
 recorded, is required in the interest of justice, it
 may resummon any such witness and after such
 further examination, cross-examination or re-examination, if any, as it may permit, the witness
 shall be discharged.
 (3) The Special Court may, notwithstanding anything
 contained in subsection (1) of section 260 or section 262 
 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, try the offence
 referred to in sections 135 to 140 and Section 150 in a
 summary way in accordance with the procedure
 prescribed in the said Code and the provisions of sections
 263 to 265 of the said Code shall, so far as may be, apply
 to such trial :
 Provided that where in the course of a summary
 trial under this subsection, it appears to the Special
 Court that the nature of the case is such that it is
 undesirable to try such case in summary way, the

 Special Court shall recall any witness who may
 have been examined and proceed to re-hear the
 case in the manner provided by the provisions of
 the said Code for the trial of such offence:
 Provided further that in the case of any conviction
 in a summary trial under this section, it shall be
 lawful for a Special Court to pass a sentence of
 imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years.
 (4) A Special Court may, with a view to obtaining the
 evidence of any person supposed to have been directly or
 indirectly concerned in or privy to, any offence tender
 pardon to such person on condition of his making a full
 and true disclosure of the circumstances within his
 knowledge relating to the offence and to every other
 person concerned whether as principal or abettor in the
 commission thereof, and any pardon so tendered shall ,
 for the purposes of section 308 of the Code of Criminal
 Procedure,1973, be deemed to have been tendered
 under section 307 thereof.
 (5) The [Special Court shall] determine the civil liability
 against a consumer or a person in terms of money for
 theft of energy which shall not be less than an amount
 equivalent to two times of the tariff rate applicable for a
 period of twelve months preceding the date of detection
 of theft of energy or the exact period of theft if
 determined which ever is less and the amount of civil
 liability so determined shall be recovered as if it were a
 decree of civil court.
 (6) In case the civil liability so determined finally by the
 Special Court is less than the amount deposited by the
 consumer or the person, the excess amount so deposited
 by the consumer or the person, to the Board or licensee
 or the concerned person, as the case may be, shall be
 refunded by the Board or licensee or the concerned
 person, as the case may be, within a fortnight from the
 date of communication of the order of the Special Court
 together with interest at the prevailing Reserve Bank of
 India prime lending rate for the period from the date of
 such deposit till the date of payment.

 Explanation. - For the purposes of this section, civil
 liability means loss or damage incurred by the Board or
 licensee or the concerned person, as the case may be,
 due to the commission of an offence referred to in
 [ sections 135 to 140 and section 150 ]. 
 
 It has been decided by this Court in CWP No.25585 of

2013 titled Rajinder Kumar and another Vs. Uttar Haryana Bijli

Vitran Nigam Limited and others on 07.1.2016 that Sections 126 

and 135 of the Act operate in different fields. Section 126 is

invoked in case of over-consumption of electricity whereas

 Section 135 of the Act is invoked in case of theft of electricity. In

this regard, in order to reach to this conclusion, this Court had

relied upon the decision in Sri Seetaram Rice Mill s case (supra).

Relevant portion of that judgment is reproduced as under:

 The officer is also under obligation to serve a noticein

 terms of Section 126 (3) of the 2003 Act upon any such

 consumer requiring him to file his objections, if any,

 against the provisional assessment before a final order of

 assessment is passed within thirty days from the date of

 service of such order of provisional assessment.
 
 Thereafter, any person served with the order of

 provisional assessment may accept such assessment and

 deposit the amount with the licensee within seven days

 of service of such provisional assessment under upon

 him or prefer an appeal against the resultant final order

 under Section 127 of the 2003 Act. The order of

 assessment under Section 126 and the period for which

 such order would be passed has to be in terms of sub-
 
 sections (5) and (6) of Section 126 of the 2003 Act. The

 Explanation to Section 126 is of some significance, which

 we shall deal with shortly hereinafter. Section 126 of the

 2003 Act falls under Part XII and relates to investigation

 and enforcement and empowers the assessing officer to

 pass an order of assessment.
 
 Section 135 of the 2003 Act deals with an offence of theft

 of electricity and the penalty that can be imposed for

 such theft. This squarely falls within the dimensions of

 criminal jurisprudence and mens rea is one of the

 relevant factors for finding a case of theft. On the

 contrary, Section 126 of the 2003 Act does not speak of

 any criminal intendment and is primarily an action and

 remedy available under the civil law. It does not have

 features or elements which are traceable to the criminal

 concept of mens rea.
 
 Thus, it would be clear that the expression

 unauthorised use of electricity under Section 126 of the

 2003 Act deals with cases of unauthorised use, even in

 the absence of intention. These cases would certainly be

 different from cases where there is dishonest abstraction

 of electricity by any of the methods enlisted under

 Section 135 of the 2003 Act. A clear example would be,

 where a consumer has used excessive load as against

 the installed load simpliciter and there is violation of the

 terms and conditions of supply, then, the case would fall

 under Section 126 of the 2003 Act. On the other hand,

 where a consumer, by any of the means and methods as

 specified under Sections 135 (a) to 135 (e) of the 2003

 Act, has abstracted energy with dishonest intention and

 without authorisation, like providing for a direct

 connection bypassing the installed meter, the case

 would fall under Section 135 of the Act.
 
 Therefore, there is a clear distinction between the cases

 that would fall under Section 126 of the 2003 Act on the

 one hand and Section 135 of the 2003 Act on the other.
 
 There is no commonality between them in law. They

 operate in different and distinct fields. The assessing

 officer has been vested with the powers to pass

 provisional and final order of assessment in cases of

 unauthorised use of electricity and cases of consumption

 of electricity beyond contracted load will squarely fall

 under such power. The legislative intention is to cover

 the cases of malpractices and unauthorised use of

 electricity and then theft which is governed by the

 provisions of Section 135 of the 2003 Act.
 
 Section 135 of the 2003 Act significantly uses the words

 whoever, dishonestly does any of the listed actions so

 as to abstract or consume electricity would be punished

 in accordance with the provisions of the 2003 Act.
 
 Dishonesty is a state of mind which has to be shown to

 exist before a person can be punished under the

 provisions of that section.
 
 Once, it is decided by this Court that Sections 126 and

 135 of the Act operate in different fields, then question would be

as to whether the petitioner is entitled to be given show cause

notice in a case of theft, if it is not a suspected theft. The

petitioners in Rajinder Kumar s case (supra) has also argued

the same point alleging that the assessment has to be made even

in a case of theft of electricity, which is invoked under Section

135 of the Act and is invoked in terms of Section 126 of the Act,

wherein there is provision for granting an opportunity of hearing

before finalizing the amount, which is to be charged as Section

126 (2) talks of provisional assessment and Section 126 (3) talks

of final assessment. 
 
 In view thereof, I am of the considered opinion that

provisions of Section 126 of the Act cannot be applied for the

purpose of assessment of amount, which is to be charged for

theft of electricity. So far as the question of notice is concerned,

it is provided in the Instructions, which has been relied by the

petitioner, that In the case of suspected theft

(broken/tampered/false seals of meter and/or metering

cubicle/cut in incoming PVC Cable or any other instance where

evidence is not available at site , and the following directions

have been issued by the respondent-Corporation, which read as

under:
 
 (a) In the cases of suspected theft, the inspection
 team shall not disconnect the supply and shall
 restore the supply through a new meter of
 appropriate rating after sealing the original
 metering equipments at site by Johnson s paper
 seals. After inspection, the authorized inspecting
 officer shall prepare a checking report giving
 details such as connected load/MDI, conditions of
 seals, working of meter and mention other
 irregularities noticed during checking. If needed,

 AIO shall remove the meter and put it in a properly
 sealed cardboard box in presence of consumer or
 his representative which shall be duly signed by
 checking team and consumer. Seizure memo
 would also be prepared. The AIO shall record the
 particulars of the same in the report before sealing
 and taking the meter/seals/metering equipments
 for testing in M T lab as per clause (d) or any other
 agency. The report must be signed by each
 member of the joint team.
 (b) The consumer shall be served within 2
 working days a notice (Annexure-II) signed by
 senior most officer of the inspecting team at the site
 as to why the case of theft of electricity should not
 be framed against him/her. The notice should
 clearly state the time, date and place at which the
 reply has to be submitted and the name of the
 designated officer to whom it should be addressed.
 The notice must be handed over to the consumer or
 his/her representative at site immediately under
 proper receipt. In case of refusal by the consumer
 or his/her representative to either accept or give a
 receipt, a copy of each must be pasted at a
 conspicuous place in/outside the premises.
 Simultaneously, the joint report and the notice shall
 be sent to the consumer under Registered Post.
 The designated officer for the above purpose
 shall be SE OP for the CT/PT meters and XEN
 OP for Whole Current Meter.
 The consumer is at liberty to represent to the
 designated officer within 3 days from the date of
 receipt of notice.
 (c) Within 4 working days from the date of
 submission of consumers reply, if made within

 prescribed period, the designated officer shall give
 a personal hearing to the consumer, if request in
 this regard has been received from consumer.
 After due consideration of the matter, the
 designated officer shall pass a detailed order within
 15 days from the date of personal hearing or
 receipt of reply, as the case may be (Annexure-III)
 as to whether the case of suspected theft of
 Electricity is established or not. The order shall
 contain the brief of inspection report, submissions
 made by consumer in his written reply and during
 personal hearing and reasons for acceptance or
 rejections of the same and the amount of
 assessment, period of assessment as per clause-III.
 (d) Testing of meter/seals/metering
 equipment:- In cases of suspected Theft of
 Electricity through tampering of meters or metering
 equipments or seals, the meter/metering
 equipments shall be taken out from the premises in
 a sealed box duly witnessed by the consumer, for
 requisite testing in the M T laboratories. The
 designated officer shall issue a letter to the
 consumer at least one week in advance, informing
 him about the date of meter testing, and requesting
 him to attend the same. If the consumer is not
 present during the testing on the scheduled date,
 the testing shall be carried out in the presence of
 the two officers of the Nigam not connected with the
 inspection.
 (e) Further, in case of suspected theft of
 electricity, if consumption pattern for last one year
 is reasonably uniform and is not less than 75% of
 the assessed consumption as per clause-III, no
 further proceedings shall be taken and the decision

 shall be communicated to the consumer under
 proper receipt within 3 working days and
 connection shall be restored through original
 meter.
 (f) Where it is established that there is a case of
 theft of Electricity, then the procedure as
 prescribed under Clause-(II)(12)(A)(c to g) shall be
 followed. 
 
 There is no dispute about this that in the case, where

there is suspicion about theft, opportunity of hearing has to be

given as admitted by learned counsel for the respondents

himself and also it is clear from the Instructions but where it is a

case of established theft as in the present case, where

allegations against the petitioner has been proved vide letter

dated 28.5.2013, in which, it has been held that the petitioner has

been found indulging in theft of electricity and it was not a case

of suspected theft because meter was found dead stop and wire

was found soldered in the counter circuit after breaking the lock

of counter. Thus, the first question is answered to the effect that

in the case of suspected theft, opportunity of hearing has to be

given but for the theft, which is writ large, as admitted by

learned counsel for the respondents, no opportunity is required

to be given. So far as the question with regard to assessment is

concerned, I am in agreement with learned counsel for the

respondents, who has submitted that formula is being used in

terms of Section 154 (5) of the Act, in which, it is provided that

the theft of energy shall not be less than the amount equivalent to

two times of the tariff rate applicable for a period of twelve

months preceding the date of detection of theft of energy or the

exact period of theft if determined which ever is less.

 Since I have already held that Section 126 of the Act

cannot be applied in case of theft, therefore, formula, which has

been applied by the respondent under Section 154 (5) of the Act

is correct formula, which also depends upon the final

adjudication of the case. So far as Section 152 of the Act in

respect of compounding of the offence is concerned, it is

applied in both the cases, where there is theft and is suspected

theft. Consequently, on the basis of this formula, the petitioner

has been served with the notice and it is for him to accept or

reject the said notice because in case, he accepts notice, he may

not have to face trial before the Special Court but if he does not

accept the notice issued by the respondents, he will make

himself liable to punishment, which may be ultimately imposed

by the Special Court along with fine.
 
 In view of the aforesaid, questions posed in the

beginning are answered and keeping in view the facts and

circumstances of the present case as narrated hereinabove,

present petitions are dismissed.
 
 January 19, 2016 (RAKESH KUMAR JAIN)
manoj JUDGE
