Maharashtra State Electricity ... vs M/S Shubhalaxmi Rice Mill, M.I.D.C. ... on 27 April, 2020 

 Author: Manish Pitale 

 Bench: Manish Pitale 

 IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT BOMBAY
 NAGPUR BENCH AT NAGPUR

 WRIT PETITION NO. 5234 OF 2016

 1) Maharashtra State Electricity
 Distribution Co. Ltd. through
 its Executive Engineer, Gondia

 2) The Assistant Executive Engineer,
 Maharashtra State Electricity
 Distribution Co. Ltd.
 Goregaon Sub Division(O M)
 Goregaon, District Gondia .. PETITIONER

 ...V E R S U S...

 1) M/s. Radhika Rice Industries
 Tumkheda, Tahsil Goregaon, Dist.Gondia
 through Shri Tulsidas s/o Bhagwandas Khatwani
 aged 35 years, occu. Business,
 R/o Tumkheda, Tahsil Goregaon,
 Dist.Gondia

 2) The Superintending Engineer
 (Electrical) Appellate Authority under the
 Electricity Act Public Works Department
 Having office at 9, Ramkrishyna Nagar,
 Ajni Square, Wardha Road, Nagpur .. RESPONDENTS

 WRIT PETITION NO. 4252 OF 2019

 The Executive Engineer (O M) Division,
 Maharashtra State Electricity Distribution
 Co. Ltd. Congress Nagar, Nagpur .. PETITIONER

 ...V E R S U S...

 1) Vidarbha Infotech Pvt. Ltd.
 c/o Alankar Real Estate Pvt. Ltd.
 FF-4, Girish Heights, Beside Bharat Talkies,
 Kamptee Road, Nagpur

 2) The Superintending Engineer
 PWD, Nagpur Region (Electrical)
 19, Ramkrishna Nagar, Wardha Road,
 Nagpur - 440 015 .. RESPONDENTS

 WRIT PETITION NO. 4444 OF 2016

 1) Maharashtra State Electricity
 Distribution Co. Ltd. through
 its Executive Engineer,Gondia

 2) The Assistant Executive Engineer,
 Maharashtra State Electricity
 Distribution Co. Ltd. Sub Division
 Gondia(Rural), Dist. Gondia .. PETITIONERS

 ...V E R S U S...

 1) M/s. Sai Baba Rice Mill,
 Through Hiranand Gaganmal Gurnan,
 R/o. Kudwah, Tahsil Goregaon, Dist. Gondia

 2) The Superintending Engineer
 (Electrical) Appellate Authority under the
 Electricity Act Public Works Department
 Having office at 9, Ramkrishyna Nagar,
 Ajni Square, Wardha Road, Nagpur .. RESPONDENTS

 WRIT PETITION NO. 4445 OF 2016

 1) Maharashtra State Electricity
 Distribution Co. Ltd. through
 its Executive Engineer, Gondia

 2) The Assistant Executive Engineer,
 Maharashtra State Electricity
 Distribution Co. Ltd. Sub Division
 Gondia(Rural), Dist. Gondia .. PETITIONER

 ...V E R S U S...

 1) M/s. Shubhalaxmi Rice Mill, MIDC
 Mundipar, Dist. Gondia
 Through Hukumchand Agrawal
 aged 62 years, occu. Business,
 R/o. 816, Nehru Nagar, Nandanvan
 Main Road, Nagpur - 440009

 2) The Superintending Engineer
 (Electrical) Appellate Authority under the
 Electricity Act Public Works Department
 Having office at 9, Ramkrishyna Nagar,
 Ajni Square, Wardha Road, Nagpur .. RESPONDENTS

 WRIT PETITION NO. 4522 OF 2016

 1) Maharashtra State Electricity
 Distribution Co. Ltd. through
 its Executive Engineer,Gondia

 2) The Assistant Executive Engineer,
 Maharashtra State Electricity
 Distribution Co. Ltd. Amgaon
 District Gondia .. PETITIONER

 ...V E R S U S...

 1) Vijay s/o Balram Agrawal,
 aged major, occu. Business,
 R/o. Gortha, Dist. Gondia

 2) The Superintending Engineer
 (Electrical) Appellate Authority under the
 Electricity Act Public Works Department
 Having office at 9, Ramkrishyna Nagar,
 Ajni Square, Wardha Road, Nagpur .. RESPONDENTS

 WRIT PETITION NO. 4578 OF 2016

 1) Maharashtra State Electricity

 Distribution Co. Ltd. through
 its Executive Engineer,Gondia

 2) The Assistant Executive Engineer,
 Maharashtra State Electricity
 Distribution Co. Ltd. Goregaon Sub Division,
 Goregaon, Dist. Gondia .. PETITIONER

 ...V E R S U S...

 1) M/s. Ganpati Rice Mill,
 Gondkhaira Dist. Gondia
 Through Mrs. Seema w/o Ramesh Karda,
 Aged about 48 years, R/o. Surajmal Colony,
 Malviya Road, Gondia

 2) The Superintending Engineer
 (Electrical) Appellate Authority under the
 Electricity Act Public Works Department
 Having office at 9, Ramkrishyna Nagar,
 Ajni Square, Wardha Road, Nagpur .. RESPONDENTS

 WRIT PETITION NO. 4579 OF 2016

 1) Maharashtra State Electricity
 Distribution Co. Ltd. through
 its Executive Engineer, Gondia

 2) The Assistant Executive Engineer,
 Maharashtra State Electricity
 Distribution Co. Ltd. Sub Division
 Gondia(Rural), Dist. Gondia .. PETITIONER

 ...V E R S U S...

 1) M/s. Shubhalaxmi Rice Mill, MIDC
 Mundipar, Dist. Gondia
 Through Hukumchand Agrawal
 aged 62 years, occu. Business,
 R/o. 816, Nehru Nagar, Nandanvan
 Main Road, Nagpur - 440009

 2) The Superintending Engineer
 (Electrical) Appellate Authority under the
 Electricity Act Public Works Department
 Having office at 9, Ramkrishyna Nagar,
 Ajni Square, Wardha Road, Nagpur .. RESPONDENTS

 WRIT PETITION NO. 4620 OF 2016

 1) Maharashtra State Electricity
 Distribution Co. Ltd. through
 its Executive Engineer, Gondia

 2) The Assistant Executive Engineer,
 Maharashtra State Electricity
 Distribution Co. Ltd. Sub Division
 Gondia(Rural), Dist. Gondia .. PETITIONER

 ...V E R S U S...

 1) M/s. Shyam Rice Mill, MIDC
 Mundipar, Dist. Gondia Through
 Sunil Kumar s/o Jagdishprasad Agrawal
 aged 48 years, occu. Business,
 R/o. Jagdish Bhawan, Durga Chowk
 Gondia, District Gondia

 2) The Superintending Engineer
 (Electrical) Appellate Authority under the
 Electricity Act Public Works Department
 Having office at 9, Ramkrishna Nagar,
 Ajni Square, Wardha Road, Nagpur .. RESPONDENTS

 -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Shri. A. M. Quazi, counsel for petitioners.
 Shri. T. D. Mandlekar, counsel for respondents [except W.P.4252/2019]
 Shri. R. D. Bhuibhar, counsel for respondents in W.P.No. 4252/2019.
 -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 CORAM :- MANISH PITALE J.
 RESERVED ON :- 23/01/2020
 PRONOUNCED ON :- 27/04/2020

 COMMON JUDGMENT

 Heard.
 
 
 (2) Rule. Rule made returnable forthwith. The

 writ petitions are heard finally with the consent of learned counsel

 for the rival parties.
 
 

 (3) This is the second round of litigation in these

 matters, which have arisen out of orders passed by the Appellate

 Authority i.e. respondent No.2 in these petitions under Section

 127 of the Electricity Act, 2003. In the first round, this Court had

 partly allowed writ petitions filed by the petitioners herein and the

 matters were remanded to the Appellate Authority for fresh

 consideration.
 
 
 (4) The petitioner No.1 is the Maharashtra State

 Electricity Distribution Company Limited (MSEDCL) and

 petitioner No.2 is the Assistant Executive Engineer of the said

 company. They are aggrieved by orders passed by the respondent

 No.2 - Appellate Authority on 11/01/2016, except in Writ Petition

 4252/2019, wherein the impugned order was passed on

 24/10/2018. It is also relevant to note here that Writ Petition

 No.4252/2019, is in respect of an order passed by the respondent

 No.2 - Appellate Authority on 24/10/2018 and the said order was

 not on remand by this Court. Nonetheless, since common issues

 arise in all these writ petitions, they are being disposed of by this

 common judgment.
 
 
 (5) The first respondents in these writ petitions are

 consumers of electricity supplied by the petitioner company and

 they were having sanctioned contract demand of electricity to the

 extent of 100 KVA. According to the petitioner company the said

 consumers exceeded the sanctioned limit of 100 KVA and this was

 found in a joint inspection. On this basis, the petitioner company

 invoked Section 126 of the aforesaid Act and proceeded on the

 basis that there had been unauthorized use of electricity by the

 respondent consumers. A provisional assessment bill was issued

 and after hearing objections of the respondent consumers, final

 assessment bill was issued to them demanding payment of charges

 as per Section 126(6) of the said Act @ equal to twice the tariff.

 The respondent consumers filed appeals under Section 127 of the

 said Act before the respondent No.2 - Appellate Authority,

 claiming that the final assessment bills raising the aforesaid

 demand were illegal. The Appellate Authority quashed the said

 bills, holding that the use of electricity beyond the sanctioned limit

 could not be said to be unauthorized use of electricity. Aggrieved

 by the said orders, the petitioners filed writ petitions before this

 Court. By common judgment and order dated 15/11/2014, this

 Court set aside the orders passed by the Appellate Authority and

 remanded the proceedings for fresh consideration in accordance

 with law laid down by Hon ble Supreme Court.
 
 
 (6) Upon remand of the proceedings, by the said

 order dated 11/01/2016 passed in these writ petitions, except in

 Writ Petition No.4252/2019, the respondent No.2 - Appellate

 Authority again held that the final assessment bills were illegal

 and thereby quashed and set aside the same. The petitioners were

 directed to refund the amount deposited by the respondent

 consumers. The petitioners approached this Court by filing the

 present writ petitions wherein notice was issued on 19/10/2016

 and this Court granted stay of the said impugned orders passed by

 the Appellate Authority. In writ petition No.4252/2019, this

 Court issued notice on 24/06/2019 and granted ad-interim stay of

 the order passed by the respondent Appellate Authority.

 (7) Mr.A.M.Quazi, learned counsel appeared on

 behalf of the petitioners in these writ petitions and submitted that

 the Appellate Authority in the impugned orders dated 11/01/2016

 committed a grave error in allowing the appeals of the respondent

 consumers. According to the learned counsel, the tenor of the

 impugned orders indicated that the Appellate Authority refused to

 abide by the law laid down by the Hon ble Supreme Court in the

 case of Executive Engineer, Southern Electricity Supply Company

 of Orissa Limited (Southco) and another vs. Sri Seetaram Rice

 Mill, (2012) 2 SCC 108, as also the position of law recognized by

 this Court in the common judgment and order dated 15/11/2014,

 passed by this Court in Writ Petition No.5985/2013 and connected

 writ petitions, whereby the earlier orders passed by the Appellate

 Authority were quashed and set aside and the matters were

 remanded to the respondent Appellate Authority. On this short

 ground, the learned counsel appearing for the petitioners

 requested for setting aside the impugned orders. It was submitted

 that the Hon ble Supreme Court in the aforesaid judgment in the

 case of Executive Engineer vs. Sri Seetaram Rice Mill (supra)

 and this Court in the common judgment and order clearly

 recognized the fact that since the respondent consumers

 admittedly consumed electricity beyond the sanctioned contract

 demand and thereby the category of tariff was changed, it

 amounted to unauthorized use of electricity as defined in Section

 126 of the aforesaid Act. On this basis, it was submitted that the

 final assessment bills issued by the petitioner company were

 justified and that respondent No.2 - Appellate Authority

 committed a grave error in setting aside the said final assessment

 bills. The interpretation of Section 126 of the said Act was

 authoritatively given by the Supreme Court in the aforesaid

 judgment and that therefore, the respondent No.2 - Appellate

 Authority could not have held against the petitioners. It was

 further submitted that respondent consumers were not justified in

 claiming that since they had already paid penalty for exceeding

 the contract demand, further charges could not be levied against

 them under Section 126 of the aforesaid Act. It was submitted

 that the tariff order issued by the Regulatory Commission

 provided for levying penalty for exceeding the contract demand

 and additional charges levied by the petitioner company under

 Section 126 of the aforesaid Act were on the basis that by

 exceeding the contract demand beyond 100 KVA, the tariff

 category of the respondent consumers had changed from that of

 Low Tension (LT) consumers to High Tension (HT) consumers

 and that this distinction was not appreciated by the Appellate

 Authority while passing the impugned orders. On this basis, the

 learned counsel for the petitioners submitted that the writ

 petitions deserved to be allowed. Insofar as Writ Petition

 No.4252/2019 was concerned, it was submitted by the learned

 counsel for the petitioners that the impugned order passed by the

 Appellate Authority was unsustainable, since it was based on a

 tariff order issued by the Regulatory Commission on 03/11/2016

 which had nothing to do with the charges levied by petitioner

 company on the respondent consumers therein, which concerned

 final assessment bill dated 29/12/2014. It was submitted that a

 subsequent tariff order could not be made the basis for testing the

 validity of final assessment bill raised by the petitioner company

 on the basis of the tariff order that was in vogue at the relevant

 time. 
 
 
 (8) On the other hand, Shri.T.D.Mandlekar,

 learned counsel for the respondent consumers in all the writ

 petitions except in Writ Petition No.4252/2019, submitted that the

 judgment of the Hon ble Supreme Court rendered in the case of

 Executive Engineer vs. Sri Seetaram Rice Mill (supra) was not

 applicable to the facts of the present cases. It was submitted that

 the Hon ble Supreme Court was concerned in the said case with

 Regulations applicable to the State of Orissa and that therefore ,

 the said judgment of the Hon ble Supreme Court would not apply

 to the facts of the present cases. It was then submitted that the

 Appellate Authority was justified in examining whether the

 present cases could be said to be cases concerning unauthorized

 use of electricity, as defined in Section 126 of the aforesaid Act

 and being an Authority having technical knowledge, in the facts of

 the present cases, it was correctly found by the Appellate

 Authority that the aforesaid provision did not apply. It was

 further submitted that once the respondent consumers had paid

 penalty for exceeding the contract demand as per the tariff order

 issued by the Regulatory Commission, there could not be further

 penalization of the respondent consumers by levying of additional

 penalty/charges under Section 126 of the aforesaid Act. It was

 further submitted that the tariff order issued by the Regulatory

 Commission in November, 2016, clarifying that when penalty was

 already paid for exceeding contract demand, the respondent

 consumers shall not be liable for action under Section 126 of the

 aforesaid Act, clearly demonstrated that the petitioner company

 was not entitled to issue the final assessment bill under Section

 126 of the aforesaid Act. 
 
 
 (9) Reliance was sought to be placed on judgment

 of the Patna High Court passed in Civil Writ Jurisdiction Case

 No.1546/2014 [ M/s Sri Ram Industries vs. The State of Bihar

 and others ] and judgment of Jharkhand High Court in Writ

 Petition No.454/2010 [ M/s Akshay Roll Mills Pvt. Ltd. vs.

 Jharkhand State Electricity Board ] to support the contentions

 raised on behalf of the respondent consumers. 
 
 
 (10) Shri. R. D. Bhuibhar, learned counsel appeared

 on behalf of respondent consumers in Writ Petition No.4252/2019

 and he sought to justify the impugned order passed by the

 Appellate Authority by relying upon the tariff order issued by the

 Regulatory Commission for the years 2016-17. It was claimed that

 the clarification issued by the Regulatory Commission applied

 retrospectively and that therefore, the respondent consumer

 therein was correctly granted benefit thereof by the Appellate

 Authority while allowing the appeal.
 
 
 (11) Heard learned counsel for the rival parties and

 perused the material on record. In these writ petitions except

 Writ Petition No.4252/2019, it is significant that this Court in the

 first round in its common judgment and order dated 15/11/2014

 passed in Writ Petition No.5985/2013 and connected petitions,

 had elaborately discussed the aforesaid judgment of the Hon ble

 Supreme Court in the case of Executive Engineer vs. Sri

 Seetaram Rice Mill (supra). The concept of unauthorized use of

 electricity in the context of Section 126 of the aforesaid Act, was

 discussed in detail in the light of law laid down by Hon ble

 Supreme Court in the said judgment. This Court had specifically

 held that a contention raised on behalf of the respondent

 consumers that the said judgment of the Hon ble Supreme Court

 was distinguishable as Regulations applicable to the State of

 Orissa were being considered, could not be accepted, because the

 Hon ble Supreme Court had interpreted Section 126 of the said

 Act on the basis of harmonious construction of various provisions

 of the Act. Therefore, it is surprising that the very same

 contention was sought to be raised on behalf of the respondent

 consumers before this Court when the present writ petitions were

 being heard. The same counsel was representing the respondent

 consumers even in the aforesaid round of litigation and it was his

 contention that was specifically rejected by this Court. Yet, the

 same contention was sought to be put forward by the learned

 counsel appearing for the respondent consumers in these writ

 petitions, except in Writ Petition No.4252/2019. In this backdrop,

 the said contention raised on behalf of the aforesaid respondent

 consumers is rejected at the outset.
 
 

 (12) Another contention raised on behalf of the

 respondent consumers was that once they had paid penalty for

 exceeding the contract demand as per the tariff order issued by

 the Regulatory Commission, no further charges of penal nature

 could be imposed upon them under Section 126 of the aforesaid

 Act. In this context, it was specifically submitted on behalf of the

 petitioners that the said charges were correctly levied by the

 petitioners under Section 126 of the aforesaid Act, as the

 respondent consumers were liable for unauthorized use of

 electricity as defined under Section 126 of the said Act,

 particularly explanation (b)(iv) to Section 126 of the said Act. It

 was submitted that the respondent consumers not only exceeded

 the contract demand, but by admittedly consuming electricity

 beyond 100 KVA, their tariff category changed from LT consumers

 to HT consumers and this certainly amounted to unauthorized use

 of electricity under Section 126 of the aforesaid Act.

 (13) In support of the aforesaid contention, the

 learned counsel for the petitioners specifically relied upon the

 various paragraphs of the judgment of the Hon ble Supreme Court

 in the case of Executive Engineer vs. Sri Seetaram Rice Mill 

 (supra). In fact, the aforesaid contention of the respondent

 consumers was dealt with by this Court even in the first round of

 litigation and it was observed in the common judgment and order

 dated 15/11/2014 passed in Writ Petition No. 5985/2013 and

 connected writ petitions that even if penalty @150% had been

 already levied as per the tariff order issued by the Regulatory

 Commission for the year 2009-10, the respondent consumers were

 liable to pay charges for unauthorized use of electricity under

 Section 126 of the Act. Yet, since the Appellate Authority, despite

 such observations made by this Court in the first round of

 litigation, again went into the question of applicability of Section

 126 of the aforesaid Act to the facts of the present cases and

 arrived at conclusions contrary to the observations made by this

 Court in the aforesaid common judgment and order, and further,

 since the learned counsel for the rival parties in the present cases

 made submissions in respect of the said judgment of the Hon ble

 Supreme Court in the case of Executive Engineer vs. Sri

 Seetaram Rice Mill (supra), this Court will be referring to the law

 laid down by the Hon ble Supreme Court in the said judgment .

 (14) A perusal of the aforesaid judgment of the

 Hon ble Supreme Court shows that one of the questions

 considered for determination was as follows :- 

 Wherever the consumer consumes electricity in excess of

 the maximum of the contracted load, would the

 provisions of Section 126 of the 2003 Act be attracted on

 its true scope and interpretation ? 
 

 (15) As is evident from the facts that emerge in the

 present petitions, the said question clearly arises for consideration

 and the levy of additional charges under Section 126 of the said

 Act by the petitioner company in the present cases is based on its

 assertion that Section 126 of the said Act is indeed attracted,

 when the consumer consumes electricity in excess of the

 maximum contracted load. The very basis for issuance of the bills

 to respondent consumers was that they exceeded the maximum

 contracted load of 100 KVA and their tariff category changed from

 LT consumers to HT consumers and hence, they were liable under

 Section 126 of the aforesaid Act.
 
 
 (16) In the said judgment , the Hon ble Supreme

 Court has interpreted Section 126 of the aforesaid Act by applying

 the principle of purposive construction. It has been categorically

 held in paragraph 35 of the said judgment that intention is not the

 foundation for invoking powers of the competent authority and

 passing an order of assessment under Section 126 of the aforesaid

 Act. Therefore, all that needs to be ascertained while considering

 issuance of an assessment bill under Section 126 of the said Act is

 to see whether the consumer indeed exceeded the contract load

 and if it resulted in usage of electricity beyond such contracted

 load. In the present case, there is no dispute about the fact that a

 joint inspection was conducted and that the respondent

 consumers had indeed exceeded not only the contract demand,

 but they also consumed electricity beyond the tariff category for

 which contract load had been sanctioned. In this very context, the

 Hon ble Supreme Court in the aforesaid judgment of the Executive

 Engineer vs. Sri Seetaram Rice Mill (supra) held as follows :- 

 70. There is another angle from which the present
 case can be examined and obviously without
 prejudice to the other contentions raised. It is a case
 where, upon inspection, the officers of the appellant
 found that respondent was consuming 142 KVA of
 electricity which was in excess of the sanctioned load.
 To the inspection report, the respondent had not filed
 any objection before the competent authority as
 contemplated under Section 126(3) and had
 approached the High Court. Limited for the purposes
 of these proceedings, excess consumption is not really
 in dispute. As stated above, the contentions raised by
 the respondent were to challenge the very jurisdiction

 of the authorities concerned.
 

 71. Consumption in excess of sanctioned load is
 violative of the terms and conditions of the
 agreement as well as of the statutory benefits. Under
 Explanation (b)(iv), unauthorised use of electricity 
 means if the electricity was used for a purpose other
 than for which the usage of electricity was
 authorised. Explanation (b)(iv), thus, would also cover
 the cases where electricity is being consumed in
 excess of sanctioned load, particularly when it
 amounts to change of category and tariff. As is clear
 from the agreement deed, the electric connection was
 given to the respondent on a contractual stipulation
 that he would consume the electricity in excess of 22
 KVA but not more than 110 KVA. The use of the
 negative language in the condition itself declares the
 intent of the parties that there was an implied
 prohibition in consuming electricity in excess of the
 maximum load as it would per se be also prejudiced.
 Not only this, the language of Regulations 82 and
 106 also prescribes that the consumer is not expected
 to make use of power in excess of the approved
 contract demand otherwise it would be change of
 user falling within the ambit of unauthorised use of
 electricity .
 

 72. Again, there is no occasion for this Court
 to give a restricted meaning to the language of
 Explanation (b)(iv) of Section 126 . According to the
 learned counsel appearing for the respondent, it is
 only the actual change in purpose of use of electricity
 and not change of category that would attract the
 provisions of Section 126 of the 2003 Act. The
 contention is that where the electricity was provided
 for a domestic purpose and is used for industrial
 purpose or commercial purpose, then alone it will
 amount to change of user or purpose. The cases of
 excess load would not fall in this category. This
 argument is again without any substance and, in fact,
 needs to be noticed only to be rejected. 
 

 (17) Thus, the case of the respondent consumers

 was completely covered in the answer given by the Hon ble

 Supreme Court to the specific question quoted above. In fact, the

 Hon ble Supreme Court in the context of the said question

 emphatically held as follows :-
 
 
 76. The consistent view of this Court would
 support the proposition that the cases of excess load
 of consumption would be squarely covered under

 Explanation (b)(iv) of Section 126 of the 2003 Act.
 
 Once this factor is established, then the assessing

 officer has to pass the final order of assessment in
 terms of Sections 126(3) to 126(6) of the 2003 Act. 
 

 (18) Despite the said position of law clearly laid

 down by the Hon ble Supreme Court in the said judgment in the

 case of Executive Engineer vs. Sri Seetaram Rice Mill (supra),

 which was also taken note of and held to be applicable in the facts

 of the present cases in the common judgment and order dated

 15/11/2014, passed by this Court in Writ Petition No.5985/2013

 and connected writ petitions, the Appellate Authority in the

 present cases committed a grave error in framing a question to the

 effect as to whether the provision of Section 126 of the said Act

 would be attracted in the present cases. On the basis of the

 admitted position of facts and the said position of law, the present

 cases of the respondent consumers stood clearly covered under

 Section 126 of the aforesaid Act and there was no propriety on the

 part of the Appellate Authority to have framed such a question in

 the first place. Not only this, the Appellate Authority went on to

 hold in favour of the respondent consumers in the face and in

 defiance of the said position of law. The discussion on alleged

 financial benefits to the respondent consumers by change of

 category by LT consumers to HT consumers was not only

 misplaced, but wholly irrelevant to the facts of the present case.

 The reference to change of tariff category was in the context of

 unauthorised use of electricity defined under Section 126 of the

 aforesaid Act, which the Appellate Authority completely failed to

 appreciate while passing the impugned orders. Therefore, the

 impugned orders deserve to be set aside. 
 
 
 (19) Insofar as Writ Petition No.4252/2019 is

 concerned, the Appellate Authority has held in favour of the

 respondent consumers by applying tariff order of the year

 2016-17. When the final assessment bill pertained to the year

 2013-14 for which the tariff orders issued by the Regulatory

 Commission for that year were in vogue, there was no question of

 applying subsequent tariff order dated 03/11/2016 issued by the

 Regulatory Commission. The learned counsel appearing for the

 respondent consumers contended that the subsequent tariff order

 was retrospectively applicable and that therefore, the respondent

 consumer therein was entitled to benefit thereof. The said

 contention is stated only to be rejected. The correctness or

 otherwise of a final assessment bill for a particular year, based on

 the prevalent tariff order issued by the Regulatory Commission,

 cannot be contested on the basis of a tariff order issued much later

 in the year 2016-17. Therefore, there is no substance in the

 aforesaid contention raised on behalf of the respondent

 consumers.
 
 
 (20) In view of the above discussion, it is clear that

 impugned order passed by the Appellate Authority in this case in

 favour of the respondent consumer is also not sustainable.

 (21) In the common judgment and order dated

 15/11/2014 passed by this Court in Writ Petition No.5985/2013

 and connected petitions, this Court had found that the Appellate

 Authority had completely misdirected itself and that therefore, it

 would be necessary to direct the Appellate Authority to reconsider

 the appeals filed by the respondent consumers in each writ

 petition in the light of law laid down by the Hon ble Supreme

 Court in the aforesaid judgment. The purpose of remand was for

 the Appellate Authority to consider whether the final assessment

 bills were correct or not, upon application of Section 126 of the

 aforesaid Act. This necessarily meant that the Appellate Authority

 was expected to assess the quantum of the charges levied by the

 petitioner company on the respondent consumers upon

 applicability of Section 126 of the aforesaid Act. This was the only

 question that the Appellate Authority was expected to consider

 and decide. A perusal of the impugned order dated 11/01/2016

 shows that such a question was indeed framed by the Appellate

 Authority, but since the said Appellate Authority committed a

 grave error in again going into the question of the very

 applicability of the Section 126 of the aforesaid Act, it failed to

 decide the only question that it could have considered and

 decided, upon remand of the matters by this Court.

 (22) A perusal of the appeals filed by the respondent

 consumers before the Appellate Authority shows that there are

 some grounds raised in the appeals indicating a challenge to the

 quantum of assessment by the petitioner company while issuing

 final assessment bills by applying Section 126 of the aforesaid Act.

 The appeal preferred by the respondent consumer in Writ Petition

 No.4252/2019, also shows that there are some grounds raised on

 this aspect of the matter. Since even till date there is no finding

 by the Appellate Authority on the merits of the question of

 quantum of assessment in the final assessment bills, there is no

 option, but to remand the proceedings back to the Appellate

 Authority for a proper decision on the said aspect of the matter,

 particularly because it necessarily involves technical expertise and

 knowledge, which the Appellate Authority is equipped to handle.

 (23) But, such orders of remand are necessitated in

 the present cases, because of the gravely erroneous approach

 adopted by the Appellate Authority in deciding the appeals after

 they were remanded by this Court. Despite the categorical

 findings rendered by this Court in the common judgment and

 orders dated 15/11/2014 passed in Writ Petition No.5985/2013

 and connected writ petitions, the Appellate Authority once again

 went into the question regarding applicability of Section 126 of

 the said Act to the respondent consumers in the facts of the

 present cases. This Court has gathered an impression that the

 Appellate Authority was unable to understand the basics of the

 manner in which the order of remand passed by this Court was to

 be worked out. The only question that could have been

 considered was regarding the quantum of assessment in the final

 assessment bills issued by the petitioner company under Section

 126 of the aforesaid Act.
 
 
 (24) Due to the approach of the Appellate Authority,

 the petitioners were required to again approach this Court by way

 of the present writ petitions, which remained pending in this

 Court from the year 2016 and in the case of Writ Petition

 No.4252/2019, from the year 2019. This led to waste of time of

 this Court to again apply the aforesaid judgment of the Hon ble

 Supreme Court in the case of Executive Engineer vs. Sri

 Seetaram Rice Mill (supra), although it was already clarified in the

 aforementioned common judgment that the same was squarely

 applicable and that there was no substance in the contentions

 raised on behalf of the respondent consumers that Section 126 of

 the aforesaid Act pertaining to unauthorized use of electricity

 would not be applicable in the facts and circumstances of the

 present case. The Appellate Authority is responsible for such a

 situation. 
 
 
 (25) Be that as it may, this Court is of the opinion

 that the matters will have to be remanded back again to the

 Appellate Authority, which needs to decide the cases

 expeditiously.
 
 
 (26) As regards the reliance placed by the learned

 counsel appearing for the respondent consumers on the judgments

 of the Patna High Court and Jharkhand High Court, suffice it to

 say that the law laid down by the Hon ble Supreme Court in the

 case of Executive Engineer vs. Sri Seetaram Rice Mill (supra) is

 absolutely clear and applying the same to the facts and

 circumstances of the present cases would show that Section 126 of

 the aforesaid Act pertaining to unauthorized use of electricity,

 applies in these cases. Therefore, there is no substance in the

 contention raised on behalf of the respondent consumers by

 placing reliance on the said judgments. 
 
 
 (27) In view of the above, the writ petitions are

 disposed of in the following manner :-
 
 
 (a) The impugned orders in the present writ

 petitions dated 11/01/2016 and 24/10/2018 passed by

 the Appellate Authority are quashed and set aside.

 (b) The proceedings are remanded to the

 respondent Appellate Authority for consideration of only

 the question of quantum of assessment made by the

 petitioner company while issuing final assessment bills

 under Section 126 of the aforesaid Act.
 
 
 (28) In the backdrop of the discussion above, it is

 made clear that the Appellate Authority will not go into the

 question, as to whether Section 126 of the aforesaid Act is

 applicable to the respondent consumers in the facts and

 circumstances of the present case. The Appellate Authority shall

 only decide the aspect of quantum of assessment as made by the

 petitioner company, on facts, after giving sufficient opportunity to

 the rival parties to place cogent material on record in that regard.

 (29) The Appellate Authority shall decide the

 appeals filed by the respondent consumers expeditiously and in

 any case within a period of six months from today.

 (30) Rule made absolute in above terms. No costs.

 JUDGE

 KOLHE/P.A.
