Ms Shyam Lal Iron And Steel Company ... vs Jharkhand State Electricity Board ... on 26 April, 2013 

 Author: Prakash Tatia 

 Bench: Chief Justice , P.P. Bhatt 

 IN THE HIGH COURT OF JHARKHAND AT RANCHI
 L.P. A. No. 59 of 2013.
 ---
M/S Shyam Lal Iron Steel Company
through one of its Directors Shri
Shambhu Lal Shaw ... ... ... ... ... ... Appellant

 Versus

1. Jharkhand State Electricity Board
 through its Chairman, Engineers
 Bhawan, Dhurwa, Ranchi.
2. The General Manager-cum-Chief
 Engineer, Singhbhum Electric Supply
 Area, Jharkhand State Electricity Board,
 Cooperative Bank Building, Bistupur,
 Jamshedpur.
3. The Electrical Superintending Engineer
 Electric Supply Circle, Jharkhand State
 Electricity Board, Jamshedpur
4. The Electrical Executive Engineer (Commercial
 Revenue), Electric Supply Circle, Jharkhand
 State Electricity Board, Jamshedpur.
5. The Electrical Executive Engineer, Electric
 Supply Sub-Division, Ghatshila Jharkhand
 State Electricity Board, Jamshedpur,
 Singhbhum (East) ... ... ... ... ... ... Respondents.

 ---
CORAM: HON BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE
 HON BLE MR. JUSTICE P.P. BHATT
 ---

For the Appellant : M/s. M.S. Mittal, Senior Advocate and Shilpi
 John, Advocate.
For the Respondents : M/s. Ajit Kumar, Rahul Kumar, Prabhat Kumar
 Singh and Saket Upadhyay, Advocate.
 ---

Reportable Dated: 26th April, 2013.
 ---

1. Heard learned counsel for the parties.

2. This Letters Patent Appeal is against the judgment dated 11th

February, 2013 disposing the writ petition being W.P. (C) No. 727 of

2013.

3. The appellant was served with a communication dated 24th

January, 2013 (Annexure 6), purported to be a provisional assessment

bill under section 126 of the Indian Electricity Act, 2003 (hereinafter

referred to as the Act ) for which a first information report was lodged

on 23rd January, 2013 against the appellant for the alleged pilferage of

electrical energy. Along with this communication dated 24th January,

2013 signed by the Electrical Superintending Engineer, Electric Supply

Circle, Jamshedpur, one calculation sheet prepared by the Electrical

Executive Engineer (C R) , Electric Supply Circle, Jamshedpur was

attached. In this calculation sheet also, there is mention of provisional

assessment bill under section 126 of the Act . The appellant, aggrieved

against this communication and bill, preferred the writ petition and

prayed that the said provisional order of assessment dated 24th

January, 2013 is in gross contravention of Clause 15.8 (xii) of the

Electricity Supply Code Amendment Regulations, 2010 and, therefore,

deserves to be set aside.

4. The appellant took various grounds to challenge the said

provisional assessment order dated 24.1.2013 but the learned single

Judge disposed of the writ petition without deciding the issues raised by

the petitioner with direction to the respondent to restore the electric

connection of the appellant s unit with a new Meter within 48 hours

upon deposit of Rs. 20 Lacs against the total liability of the appellant as

raised in the provisional assessment bill of Rs. 48,39,666.00. So far as

the contentions of the appellant which were raised, the learned single

Judge observed that rest of the contentions raised by the appellant are

relating to the issues, which can only be determined either after

conclusion of the investigation carried out pursuant to the first

information report lodged on the basis of inspection done by the

respondents or on the basis of final assessment to be made by the

competent authority under Section 126 of the Act. Aggrieved against

the said judgment dated 11.2.2013 referred above, the appellant has

preferred this Letters Patent Appeal.

5. Learned Senior Advocate for the appellant Shri M.S. Mittal and

counsel for the JSEB argued on merits of the issues raised by the

appellant in detail.

6. It is clear from the material placed on record before this Court,

which are not in dispute that the appellant/petitioner himself wrote a

letter to the concerned authority on 19.1.2013 informing that some

miscreants have broken the seal of Meter reading room and also

disconnected the earthing wire of the Transformer and, therefore,

requested to refix the seal. In response to this letter of the appellant,

one inspection team came from the Jharkhand State Electricity Board on

23.1.2013 and prepared a inspection report, wherein it has been alleged

that during checking, the Metering unit L.V. Box one of the left side

hole, which was sealed by M. Seal at the time of installation, and

charging the metering unit, was found interfered and M. Seal found wet.

L.V. Box opened and it was found that wet M. Seal easily removed and

hole appeared from which secondary terminals may be accessed from

outside without disturbing any seals of the L.V. Box, whereas the right

side Metering Cable, entry M- Seal which was done on 8.12.2012 was

found in healthy condition. During the inspection, no any foreign

materials were found inside the secondary terminal box. Then after

recording the requisite details, it was observed that the supply wing was

instructed to lodge first information report as per provisions of law

obviously for electricity theft. The relevant materials i.e., Metering Unit

etc. were seized and memo was prepared. The appellant placed on

record a copy of the inspection report. In pursuance of that inspection

report, first information report was lodged on 23.1.2013 before the

concerned police station by the Assistant Engineer of the Board, a copy

of the first information report was also placed on record as Annexure- 4.

 7. According to learned counsel for the appellant Shri M.S. Mittal, the

Electric Supply Code Amendment Regulation, 2010 (hereinafter referred to

as Regulations, 2010 ), has prescribed complete procedure for such type

of cases, how the Electricity Board will act and will assess the electricity

consumption of the relevant period of alleged theft and the procedure

prescribed under clause 15.8 of Regulations, 2010 have not been

followed in spite of appellant submitting a written reply wherein the

appellant has drawn attention of the authority concerned to the relevant

provisions of Section 126 as well as the relevant provisions made in the

Regulations, 2010. Since the appellant approached this Court before any

final assessment order could have been passed, the respondents were

fully aware of the contentions of the appellant which have already been

raised in the writ petition. A final assessment order was passed after

disposal of the writ petition and during the pendency of the Letters

Patent Appeal, yet the authority did not look into the relevant provisions

of law.
 
 8. According to learned counsel for the appellant as per clause 15.8

 (viii), it is clear that in case sufficient evidence is found to establish

direct theft of Electricity, then the licensee/supplier will proceed as per

 Section 135 (1A) of the Act. As per clause 15.8 (ix), the Authorized

Officer is required to assess the energy consumption as per the

assessment formula given in Annexure-1 to the Regulations. It is clear

from the proviso to clause (xi) of Clause 15.8 that the criminal case can

be registered only in case of suspected theft. If the consumption pattern

for last one year is reasonably uniform and is not less than 75% of the

assessed consumption, no further proceedings shall be taken and the

decisions shall be communicated to the consumer. Obviously on such

dropping of the proceeding as per Sub clause xii, in case after detailed

examination of the evidence and consumption pattern of the consumer, if

the licensee or supplier is convinced that a prima facie case is made out for

abstraction, consumption or use of electricity dishonestly against the

consumer, the Licensee or supplier shall, within 7 days of the inspection

will serve a provisional assessment order assessed as per clause 15.8

(xxi) of the Regulations along with show cause notice to the consumer,

giving reasons as to why a case of theft should not be booked against

such consumer. Such notice should also contained the details for

arriving at such decision and points on which reply has to be submitted

by the consumer. The Sub clause xii is mandatory in character because

of the reason that consequence of non following the provisions of sub

clause xii, is given under clause xiii, which shows that in case, such

show cause notice is not served within a period of 30 days from the date

of inspection, then the case of suspected theft shall be considered as

dropped and no further action shall be initiated against the consumer.

 9. According to learned Senior counsel for the appellant Shri M.S.

Mittal, in this case firstly no provisional assessment order was ever

made; secondly the communication dated 24.1.2013 is not an

assessment order but it is a forwarding letter along with only a

calculation Sheet which has been forwarded by the Electrical

Superintending Engineer i.e., competent authority. A Calculation Sheet

is prepared by the Electrical Executive Engineer, who is neither the

Assessing Authority nor a competent authority to make assessment of

consumption of Electricity under the Regulations, 2010. Therefore, there

arises no question of serving a show cause notice on the basis of the

any provisional assessment. Therefore, in view of the sub clause xiii of

clause 15.8, the respondents can not proceed to determine any liability

on the appellant. It is also submitted that assuming for the shake of

argument that communication dated 24.1.2013 is any short of order;

firstly it is not the order of assessment of the electricity consumption;

secondly even if calculation sheet could have been prepared by the

Executive Engineer then, Electrical Superintending Engineer has not

applied his mind to the correctness of the calculation made by the

Electrical Executive Engineer nor he approved it, therefore, the

calculation as made in annexed calculation sheet is only calculation

made by the Executive Engineer and not by the assessing authority or

competent authority.
 
 10. Learned counsel for the appellant also submitted that the

appellant s case is also falling under proviso to clause xi as the

appellant s consumption at the relevant period of alleged theft was not

less than 75% of the previous year consumption pattern. Learned

counsel for the appellant has shown calculation and also submitted that

the respondents themselves admitted that the appellant s unit was

running for 18 hours per day whereas while calculating it has taken into

account 23 hour running at the appellant s unit. In view of the above

reason, the mistake has been committed by respondents and the

appellant s case is covered under proviso to sub clause xi of clause 15.8

of the Regulations, 2010 and the respondent should not have treated it

as case of electricity theft.
 
 11. Learned counsel for the appellant then assailed the assessment

order on various grounds including that the appellant was never given a

copy of any reply filed by any Officer of the Electricity Board before the

said competent authority and the competent authority has taken into

account the extraneous facts and decided the matter with prejudice as

the said authority in final assessment order dated 9th April, 2013 even

observed that the appellant was fully involved in pilfering power through

short circuiting of secondary terminal box. The said authority i.e., the

Electrical Superintending Engineer in final assessment order dated 9th

April, 2013 has not considered the plea raised by the appellant nor

examined the calculation which has been submitted even by the

department to find out the correctness of the calculation and to find out

whether the appellant s case is required to be dropped under proviso to

Clause (xi) of Regulations 15.8.
 
 12. Learned counsel for the appellant also pointed out that the

Ministry of Power, Government of India has also issued a clarificatory

order on 12th November, 2007, whereby it has been made clear that

procedure of assessment under section 135 of the Act will be the same

as has been prescribed for the cases under section 126 of the Act.

Therefore, in view of the provisions prescribed under section 126 of the

Act also, the appellant was entitled to show cause notice before passing

any assessment order. It is also submitted that, otherwise also, the

appellant was entitled to reasonable opportunity of hearing before any

order of assessment was passed.
 
 13. Learned counsel for the appellant relied upon the judgment of the

Calcutta High Court in the case of Hasi Mazumdar Anr. Vs. The West

Bengal State Electricity Board Ors. (AIR 2006 Cal 59) and the

judgment of the Delhi high Court in the case of Harvinder Motors V.

B.S.E..S. Rajdhani Power Ltd. (AIR 2007 Del 85) wherein some similar

issues, according to the appellant, were involved. 
 
 14. Learned counsel for the Jharkhand State Electricity Board

(hereinafter referred to as the Board ) Shri Ajit Kumar, vehemently

submitted that, there is vast difference between section 126 and section

135 of the Act. Both deals with entirely different contingencies and are

independent and separate provisions. Section 135 of the Act deals with

the cases of theft of electricity and finding difficulty in implementation

of some of the measures, sub-Section (1A) has been added in Section

135 whereby power has been given to the licensee or supplier of the

electricity to disconnect immediately the supply of electricity connection

upon detection of theft of electricity by the consumer. A provision has

been made so that the amount of electricity theft can be assessed and

upon deposit of such assessed amount, without prejudice to the

obligation of lodging of the complaint i,e, a criminal case, the electric

connection may be restored. Whereas section 126 has no application to

the case of theft and this provision deals with civil wrong whereunder

provisional assessment order is required to be passed after affording

reasonable opportunity of hearing and thereafter, final assessment

order can be made. In contrast to it, in the procedure prescribed under

sub-section (1A) of Section 135 , no provisional assessment is required

to be made. Learned counsel for the Electricity Board submitted that

separate regulations also have been framed in consonance to sections

126 and 135 of the Act by exercising power conferred by Clause (x) of

Sub-Section (2) of Section 181 read with Section 50 of the Act. Finding

some difficulties, the Electricity (Removal of Difficulties) Orders, 2005

was issued and it has been provided that certain more rule making

power will be available to the State Commission under section 50 of the

Act. Be that as it may, no body has disputed the power of State

Commission in issuing Regulations 2010 and the appellant has also

relied on these very Regulation 2010 and submitted that these

Regulations prescribed the procedure for proceeding in a case like that

of appellant and the appellant s own case is that these Regulations have

not been followed and, therefore, the alleged assessment order dated

24th January, 2013 and all proceedings may be quashed and set aside.

 15. Learned counsel for the Jharkhand Electricity Board has also relied

upon the judgment of the Supreme Court delivered in the case of

Executive Engineer, Southern Electricity Supply Company of Orissa

Limited (Southco) and Another vs. Sri Seetaram Rice Mill, reported in

[2012 (2) SCC 108] where it has made clear that the two provisions; one

under Section 126 and another under Section 135 of the Electricity Act,

2003 are absolutely distinct and separate provisions and having

different scope. In this case, the case has been registered under Section

135 of the Act, whereas the appellant is seeking observance of the

procedure as provided under Section 126 . The appellant is also seeking

observance of the provision of clause 15.8 of Regulations, 2010 which

are applicable to the cases of different situations. According to

learned counsel for the Jharkhand State Electricity Board, the procedure

of this case is prescribed under Section 135 of the Act itself as well as

has been prescribed in detail under sub clause (i) to (x) of clause 15.8

of the Regulations, 2010 and those provisions have been fully observed

which are in consonance to sub section (1A) of Section 135 of the Act. It

is also submitted that the provisions contained under Section 135 or

under clause 15.8 of the Regulations, 2010 are relevant for dealing the

cases of theft and have been fully observed in present case and there is

no need of any provisional assessment order or issuance of show cause

notice and sub clause (x), proviso to sub clause (ix) and sub clause (xii)

etc. have no application to the facts of the case.
 
 16. We considered the submissions of learned counsel for the parties

and perused the facts as well as the law brought to our notice and we

considered the judgments relied upon by the learned counsel for the

parties.

 17. In view of the judgments of the Hon ble Supreme Court delivered

in the case of Sri Seetaram Rice Mill (supra) it is clear that the Section

126 and Section 135 are kept in different Chapters in the Electricity Act,

2003 and Section 126 is in Part XII of the Indian Electricity Act, 2003 

whereas Section 135 is in Part XIV of the Act . The Part XII deals with the

investigation and enforcement. Under this Part XII, under the heading of

 Investigation and Enforcement , first Section is Section 126 which

provides for assessment in a situation when on an inspection of any

place or premises or after inspection of the equipments, gadgets

machines, devices found connected or used, or after inspection records

maintained by any person, the Assessing Officer comes to the

conclusion that such person is indulging in unauthorized use of

electricity, then in that situation, he shall provisionally assess to the

best of his judgment the electricity charges payable by such

person or by any other person benefited by such use. After sub section

(1) of Section 126 , by sub section (2) of Section 126 , it is provided that

the order of provisional assessment shall be served upon the person

obviously on the concerned person. Sub Section (3) gives a right to such

person to submit his objection against the provisional assessment and

the Assessing Officer is under obligation to give reasonable opportunity

of hearing to such person upon whom the provisional assessment order

has been served then the Assessing Officer is required to pass a final

assessment order. The Assessing Officer is the Officer of the State or

Board or licensee, who may be designated as such by the State

Government, as per clause (a) of Explanation appended to Section 126 

of the Act. Such assessment orders are appealable under Section 126 of

the Act.
 
 18. Clause 15.7 of Regulations, 2010 deals with the procedure and

method of assessment of electricity charges and clause 15.7 specifically

mentioned that this provision is a method of assessment of electricity

charges in case of Unauthorized Use of Electricity . The Hon ble

Supreme Court in the case of Sri Seetaram Rice Mill (supra) made it

clear that in case of theft of electricity, there is element of mensrea

which is not necessarily in the cases which are falling under Section 126 

of the Act. Therefore, it appears that a separate procedure has been

prescribed under Section 126 the Act for assessment of electricity

charges in case of Unauthorized use of Electricity which procedure is

different than the procedure prescribed under sub section (1A) of

 Section 135 . Not only that both Sections are falling in different chapter

and covering different fields and prescribing different procedures

but in a case of civil liability under Section 126 , it is provided that

before passing a final assessment order a provisional

assessment order is to be made. It appears that there may be a

situation where it is difficult to find out immediately whether it is a

case of Unauthorized Use of Electricity or case of theft of electricity.

There may be suspected cases of theft of electricity and, therefore,

some safeguards have been provided under these provisions and

particularly by Regulations 2010 which take care of bona fide consumer

who may not suffer only on account of suspicion and at the same time

the licensee or supplier of the electricity may also not be prejudiced

because of that situation and, therefore, a third category has carved out

which is a category of suspected theft . In case of suspected theft, as

per various provisions, it will appear that till the suspected case of theft

is investigated by the concerned Officer by collecting evidence, the

electricity supply of the consumer may not be disconnected and at the

same time it is essential to protect the interest of the licensee, who may

get the benefit of supply of the electricity, the electricity supply may be

continued.
 
 19. After considering Sections 126 and 135 as well as Regulations

2010 we found that clause 15.7 in Regulations, 2010, prescribed the

procedure to be followed in a case found under Section 126 of the Act.

Sub clause (i) of Clause 15.7 of the Regulations, 2010 provides which is

similar to sub section (i) of Section 126 , that in case of assessment,

Assessing Officer comes to the conclusion that the consumer is indulged

in Unauthorized Use of Electricity , he shall provisionally assess to the

best of his judgment, the electricity charges payable by such person.

Sub clause (ii) of clause 15.7 of the Regulations,2010 has defined the

 unauthorized use of electricity . The procedure of booking a case of

unauthorized use of electricity has been prescribed under sub clause (iv)

of clause 15.7 onwards. As per sub clause (ix) of clause 15.7 of the

Regulations, 2010, it has been provided that if the Assessing

Officer as per clause 15.7 (x) suspects that the unauthorized

use of electricity has taken place, he shall serve a provisional

assessment order assessed as per clause 15.7 (xx) and

(xxi) of the Regulations, 2010 with a clear notice giving reasons as

to why a case of unauthorized use of electricity should not be booked

against such consumer. Then under these Regulations, right has been

given to the consumer to submit reply under sub clause (xiv) and then

opportunity of hearing is provided under sub clauses (xvi) and (xvii),

then the final assessment order is passed. The period of assessment is

also prescribed as per clause (a)(xx) of clause 15.7 of the Regulations,

2010. Formula for assessment in such case is also given in sub clause

(xxi) of clause 15.7. The provisions similar to Section 127 is also

incorporated in the Regulations, 2010 by providing sub clause (xxvii),

which allows the appeal against the assessment order, obviously passed

under Section 126 read with clause 15.7 of the Regulations, 2010.

 20. A separate provision has been prescribed for the cases of theft 

of electricity obviously, for the reason that the cases of unauthorized

use of electricity have been separated by Section 126 of Act from the

cases of theft. The two cases by their own nature are distinct in the case

of unauthorized use of electricity , there may not be an element of

mens rea whereas in the case of theft, there is an element of mens rea

the cases under Section 126 may also include the cases where it is not

necessary to lodge criminal case whereas in a case of theft of

electricity it is obligatory upon the Officer concerned to lodge a criminal

case. At this juncture, it will be appropriate to refer the observations

made by the Supreme Court in the case of Jagmodhan Mehatabsing

Gujaral and others vs. State of Maharashtra [(2006) (8) SCC 629]. The

Hon ble Supreme Court has taken note of the cases of large scale theft

of electricity and found that it is a very alarming problem faced by all

the State Electricity Boards in our country which causing loss to the

State Revenue running in hundreds of crores of rupees every year. The

Hon ble Supreme Court observed that in our considered view, after

proper adjudication of the cases of all those who are found to be guilty

of the offence of committing theft of electricity; apart from the sentence

of conviction, the Court should invariably impose heavy fine making

theft of electricity, a wholly non-profitable venture. The Hon ble

Supreme Court observed that, the most effective steps to curb this

tendency perhaps could be to discontinue the supply of the electricity to

those consumers temporarily or permanently, who have been caught

abstracting electricity in a clandestine manner on more than one

occasion. The Hon ble Supreme Court suggested this legislate

incorporating, as a form of punishment by amending Section 39 of the

Electricity Act, 1910. Therefore, by sub section (1A) of Section 135 , it

has been specifically provided that the authority will be entitled to

disconnect the electric supply upon detection of theft of electricity. 

 21. We find a difference between the procedure prescribed to Sections

126 and 135 of the Act. By procedure prescribed under Section 126 ,

opportunities are given to the consumers to contest the assessment

order which is provisional and when final assessment is made then by

preferring an appeal, such procedure is not provided either under sub-Section (1A) of Section 135 or under the relevant sub-clauses of Clause

15.8.
 
 22. Clause 15.8 of Regulations 2010 is prescribing the method of

assessment of electricity charges in case of theft of electricity. The

heading itself made it clear that this applies to the cases of theft of

electricity. Sub-Clause (I) of Clause 15.8 clearly provides that whenever

a case of theft of energy is detected, the authorized officer shall carry

out assessment in accordance with the procedure laid down in the

section below, obviously, under Sub-Clauses made under Clause 15.8. It

will be appropriate to mention that, in this procedure as prescribed

under Clause 15.8, the authorized officer is competent to conduct

inspection of any premises where he has received information regarding

theft of the electricity, which may be from any source and he may

inspect the premises suo motu with safeguards which are required to be

taken at the time of inspection as provided in Sub-clause (iv) of Clause

15.8. The authorized officer is required to prepare a report giving details

such as connected load, condition of meter seals working of meter and

he is also supposed to mention irregularity noticed which includes

noting of tampered meter, artificial means adopted for theft of energy. A

report is also required to be clear and it should indicate whether

sufficient evidence substantiating the fact that theft of energy was

found or not, is also required to be incorporated in such report. The

details of evidence are also required to be incorporated. This is far

obvious reasons and to protect consumer also as this procedure will

avoid manipulation of evidence.
 
 23. Then finding the difficulty of the consumers, it has been provided

that mere missing of the seal of the meter or tampered or breakage of

glass window shall themselves will not be treated to be evidence for

theft of electricity unless these facts are corroborated by consumption

pattern of the consumer and such other evidence as may be available.

This applies to the cases where the Bord s officer is unable to find

reasons to conclude it as a clear case of theft. Therefore, in the

suspected case of theft of electricity, the corroborative evidence is required

obviously, which may be available on spot at the time of inspection or

obviously which may be gathered like consumption pattern of the

consumer. Only in case when sufficient evidence is found to establish theft

of electricity, then the electricity will be disconnected and material

evidence including wire cables meter, service line etc. are required to be

seized and a complaint is required to be lodged in writing to the concerned

police station within 24 hours. Such authorized officer is under

obligation to disconnect the electricity connection within two days from

the date of inspection and is required to file a case against the

consumer before the Special Court as per provision of Section 135 of the

Act. Under sub-clauses (viii) and (ix) of Clause 15.8, it is provided that

the assessing officer shall assess as per the assessment formula given

in Annexure-1 to the Regulations. Therefore, we find that sub-Clause (x)

of Clause 15.8 of the Regulations 2010 also deals with cases of

suspected theft and so is Sub clause (ix) including its proviso.

 24. As we have already observed, there may be unauthorized use of

electricity falling under Section 126 of the Act or there may be clear

case of theft of electricity straightway falling under Section 135(1A) .

There may be a third type of case i.e., the case of suspected theft. To

deal with a case of suspected theft, Sub Clause (x) of Clause 15.8

provides that in case of suspected theft, the authorized officer shall

remove the old meter under a seizure memo and seal it in presence of

the consumer or his representative and the authorized officer. Because

it is a case of suspected theft only, it has been provided that the

electric supply will not be discontinued but it will be continued with a

new meter. In such cases the old meter shall be tested in presence of

the consumer and the authorized officer at a third party facility

approved by the commission from where a test report will be obtained in

writing. In a case of suspected theft, such authorized officer is required

to record reason of suspected theft in the premises in his report. Not

only this, that in a case of suspected theft, the electricity of the

consumer is required to be continued but if it is found that the

consumption pattern for the last one year of the consumer is reasonably

uniformed and is not less than 75% of the assessed consumption, no

further proceedings shall be taken and the decision shall be

communicated to the consumer; meaning thereby, by this provision it

has been provided that, if in any case, no substantial gain to the

consumer from his act, then it may be presumed that it was not a case

of theft.
 
 25. Sub-clause (xiv) of Clause 15.8 is also relevant, which provides

that theft shall not be limited to physical interference with the meter

found during physical inspection. It shall also include theft committed by

resorting to external methods, such as, remote control/high voltage

injunction etc., which interfere with the accurate registration of the

energy consumed. It has further been made clear in that very clause

that theft of electricity may be established by analysis of metering data

downloaded by a third party facility approved by the commission and

then it has been provided that in case theft of energy is determined by

way of meter down load, the provisional assessment order assessed

as per Clause 15.8 (xxi) of the Regulations along with show cause notice

will be sent to the consumer/user. Sub-clause (xv) gives right to such a

person/consumer to file objection against the provisional assessment

then after affording reasonable opportunity of hearing, assessment

order is required to be passed as provided under sub-clause (xx)

onwards. In Section 135 as a whole or under chapter (xiv) dealing with

the offences and penalty no provision has been made providing for

appeal against such assessment order. The obvious reason is that

separate procedure has been prescribed to deal with such assessment

under part (xv) under sub-Section (5) and (6) of Section 154 giving

power to the Special Courts constituted under Section 153 of the Act to

decide about the civil liability. Therefore, from all angle as well as from

all point of view and nature of the activity of the consumer and

allegation, different procedures have been prescribed not only by

Regulations of 2010 but the Act itself under Section 126 in chapter (xii)

and another under Section 135 in chapter (xiv) of the Act.

 26. In view of the above, we cannot read the communication dated

12th November, 2007 of the Ministry of Power as a clarificatory order

mixing the two subjects for the purpose of assessment of energy

consumed, one under- Section 126 and another under Section 135 : or

one Clause 15.7 and another Clause 15.8 of the Regulations of 2010 as

one and the same.

 27. It will be appropriate to mention here that under Section 127 

which is statutory provision, right to appeal has been provided only

against the order passed under Section 126 and not against the order

passed under provision of Section 135 (1A) or under clause 15.8 of the

Regulations 2010. Therefore, by implication or by clarification, it cannot

be provided that the orders of assessment, which are passed under the

provision of Section 135 (1A) or under-Clause 15.8 of the Regulations

2010 for the cases of theft are appellable irrespective of the fact that for

those orders, a provision has been made under the Act empowering the

Special Court to examine those assessment orders under Section 154(5) 

and (6) of the Act.
 
 28. Coming to the facts of the case, it is true that on 19th January,

2013, the appellant gave a letter to the respondent Board informing that

the meter reading room seal has been broken and one earthing wire

also has been disconnected by some miscreants to harm the appellant s

unit and after this letter, the Inspection Team visited the appellant s site

on 23rd January, 2013 and inspected the site and the meter and

prepared the inspection report. In that inspection report itself, it is

mentioned that it is a case of theft of electricity and first information

report has been lodged, as per the provisions of law. Therefore, in the

opinion of the inspecting team, it was not a case of suspected theft or a

case of only unauthorised use of electricity. In the inspection report,

reason for drawing inference of theft has been mentioned in paragraph

5, which we have already referred above . In consequence to this

inspection report, a first information report was lodged on the same

date i.e. on 23rd January, 2013. The first information report or the

criminal prosecution initiated is not under challenge before us. The

appellant was then served with communication dated 24th January,

2013 (Annexure 6) which is purported to be the assessment bill under

 section 126 of the Act. In Section 126 of the Act, only assessment is

made of the electricity consumed by the person who has indulged in

unauthorised use of electricity. In the said communication dated 24th

January, 2013, it is also mentioned that a first information report has

already been lodged on 23rd January, 2013 against the appellant for the

allegation of pilferage of electricity. This action could have been taken

under Chapter XIV and under section 135 and specifically sub-section

(1A) as sub-section (1) of section 135 provides that theft of electricity

shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend for

three years or with fine or with both. Sub-Section (1A) provides forthwith

disconnection of supply of electricity upon detection of theft of

electricity. This procedure was followed and inspite of following this

procedure, it appears that under wrong impression, it has been

mentioned that the bill annexed with communication dated 24th

January, 2013 is a provisional assessment bill under section 126 of the

Act. As per calculation sheet, the bill was prepared adopting the formula

given in Annexure 1 to the Regulations 2010 and not according to the

formula given in sub-clause (xxi) of Clause 15.7 of the Regulations.

Therefore, for the purpose of preparing a bill, the procedure of Clause

15.8 was followed and not Clause 15.7. This also supports our view that

mention of provisional assessment bill or bill under section 126 of the

Act is under mistaken belief.
 
 29. We are of the considered opinion that because of sending the

communication dated 24th January, 2013, annexing calculation sheet

which is calculation of the demand against the person who is found to

be indulged in theft will not make any difference nor it will convert the

proceeding into one under section 126 of the Act when the facts are

very clear as on the date of inspection itself it was treated to be a case

of electricity theft and not even a case of suspected theft of electricity,

much less to the case of unauthorised consumption of electricity, for

which provision is made under section 126 of the Act.
 
 30. We are of the view that procedure as given in sub-clauses (x)

to (xv) of Clause 15.8 have no application to the cases of electricity

theft. The reason for our holding so is apparent from the language used

in the various sub-clauses of Clause 15.8 of the Regulations. As per sub-clause (iv) of Clause 15.8, the inspection team after following the

requirement mentioned in this clause, when inspect the site is required

to prepare a report giving details such as connected load, condition of

meter seal, working of meter also required to mention any irregularity

notice such as tampered meter, artificial means adopted for theft of

energy as per sub-clause (vi) of Clause 15.8, report is required to

indicate whether sufficient evidence substantiating the fact that theft of

energy was found or not. The details of such evidence are also required

to be recorded in the report. As per sub-clause (viii) of Clause 15.8, in

case sufficient evidence is found to establish direct theft of electricity,

the licensee or supplier shall disconnect the supply of electricity and all

materials are required to be seized, which may be evidence wires,

cables, meter, service line etc. and the complaint is required to be

lodged in writing in the concerned police station about the theft and it is

required to be done within 24 hours, then authorized officer is required

to file a case against the consumer in a designated Special Court as per

the provisions of Section 135 of the Act within two days from the date of

inspection and then as per the last clause relevant for the theft cases,

which is sub-clause (ix) of Clause 15.8, the authorized officer is required

to assess the energy consumption as per assessment formula given in

Annexure-1 of the Regulations. After this sub-clause (ix) of Clause 15.8,

word of suspected theft has been used. After Sub Clause (ix) of

Clause 15.8, provisions deals with cases of suspected theft . From Sub

Clause (x) of Clause 15.8, words suspected theft have been used. For

the cases of suspected theft a separate procedure has been provided

and before reaching to the final conclusion of theft, authorized officer is

allowed to collect the evidence and then find out whether such alleged

theft resulted into less consumption of electricity by the assessee during

the relevant period and if it is found that it is a marginal difference by

25% and then the proceeding is required to be dropped. Such is not in a

case when a definite opinion is formed by the authorized officer about

the commission of theft. Non-making of assessment order in time as

provided under sub-clause (xiii) of Clause 15.8. Sub-clause (xii) of

Clause 15.8 provides for provisional assessment and as we have

observed that it applies in a case where the case is of suspected theft

and it is further clear from sub-clause (xiv) of Clause 15.8 which says

that even in a case where no physical interference is found with the

meter during the inspection, even then a theft can be found it by

resorting to external method, such as, remote control/high voltage

injection etc., the registration of energy consumed has been interfered.

Apart from this in a suspected case of theft, theft can be established by

analysis of metering data down loaded by a third party facility approved

by the commission. Because of this reason that, some evidence may be

found subsequently or on investigation or on assessment, opinion of

commission of theft can be formed, a different procedure has been

prescribed for the cases where there is no firm opinion has been formed

on spot by the officer concerned about the commission of theft. Because

of this reason it appears that before passing any final assessment order,

a provisional assessment is required to be made and served on the

assessee under Clause 15.8, under sub-clause (xii) and (xviii) of

Clause 15.8 which alone entitled the consumer to submit his objection,

whereas for assessment under sub-clause (ix) of Clause 15.8 such

opportunity is not given. Therefore the consumer can file objection only

in a case when order has been served under Clause 15.8 (xii) or (xiv) of

the Regulations.
 
 31. Sub-clause (xxv) of Clause 15.8 in consonance with the Act

provides in all cases where theft of electricity has been detected, the

case shall be filed before appropriate Court for decision in the matter

unless offence is compounded under Section 152 of the Act. The

suspected case of theft may stand converted to the case of theft but

before converting such case to the case of theft, the licensee is required

to take care of proviso to sub-clause (ix) of Clause 15.8 as well as sub-clauses (xii) and (xiii) of Clause 15.8. If a case of consumer is covered

under the proviso to sub-clause (ix) of Clause 15.8 and the procedure as

provided under sub-clauses (xii) and (xiii) of Clause 15.8 did not follow,

then those cases of suspected theft are required to be dropped and

the case of theft cannot be dropped because of non-making of

provisional assessment or non-serving of notice as provided under sub-clause (xiii) of Clause 15.8 of the Regulations.
 
 32. In this case, as we have already noticed, the procedure was

followed and rightly followed of Section 135 read with Clause 15.8 of the

Regulations and particularly as provided in Sub-Clauses (i) to (ix). There

was no need to follow the procedure of sub-clauses (x) to (xv). The

mentioning of provisional assessment bill under section 126 of the Act in

communication dated 24th January, 2013 and calculation-sheet is not

relevant and cannot be treated as provisional assessment under section

 126 of the Act or Clause 15.7 of the Regulations.
 
 33. In view of the above reasons, the communication dated 24th

 January, 2013 and the calculation sheet annexed with the said

 communication, need not be set aside. The appellant was given

 opportunity to appear before the concerned authority in view of the

 order passed by this Court and thereupon the competent authority has

 passed the order of assessment during the pendency of the Letters

 Patent Appeal on 9th April, 2013.
 
 34. Learned counsel for the appellant questioned the final assessment

 order dated 9th April, 2013 by filing rejoinder to the counter affidavit

 filed by the Electricity Board.
 
 35. However, we are of the opinion that against this order, statutory

 remedy is available to the appellant under section 154 (5) and (6) of the

 Act. Therefore, we are of the considered opinion that it is not a fit case

 where we should interfere in the order of assessment which was passed

 after giving opportunity to the appellant and can be subject matter

 before the Special Court where the case is pending.
 
 36. In view of the above reasons, we do not find any merit in this

 Letters Patent Appeal and it is, accordingly, dismissed.

 37. In view of the above reasons, the interim order passed by this

 Court dated 22nd February, 2013 stands set aside and the Board will be

 entitled to recover the assessed amount from the bank guarantee or

 otherwise.
 
 

 (Prakash Tatia, C.J.)

 (P.P. Bhatt, J.)

AKS.Cp.2.
