Ajmer Vidyut Vitran Nigam Ltd And Others vs Gopal Ram on 21 October, 2013 

 Author: Alok Sharma 

 Bench: Alok Sharma 

 

 
 
 

 IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE FOR RAJASTHAN AT JAIPUR BENCH JAIPUR

O R D E R

S.B. CIVIL SECOND APPEAL NO.381/2011
(Ajmer Vidhyut Vitran Nigam Ltd. Ors. Vs. Gopal Ram)

Date of Order : 21.10.2013

HON BLE MR. JUSTICE ALOK SHARMA

Mr. Raunak Singhvi, for the defendants-appellants.
Mr. Devendra Sharma, for the plaintiff-respondent.
BY THE COURT 


 This second appeal impugns the judgment and decree dated 19.02.2011, passed by the first appellate court upsetting and quashing the judgment and decree dated 25.03.2010, passed by the Civil Judge (Jr.Div.), Sikar whereby the suit for declaration and permanent injunction filed by the plaintiff-respondent (hereinafter the plaintiff ) was dismissed. The first appellate court has thus decreed the plaintiff s suit as laid in a matter pertaining to unauthorised abstraction of electrical energy. 
 In my considered opinion, following substantial question of law arises in this second appeal :
 (1) Whether the civil court has jurisdiction in addressing matters pertaining to unauthorised abstraction of electrical energy and whether such jurisdiction of the civil court is altogether debarred with reference to Section 145 of the Electricity Act, 2003.
 
 Admit. With the consent of the counsel for the parties, the appeal has been finally heard.
 Counsel for the defendant-appellant (hereinafter the defendant ) submits that Section 145 of the Electricity Act, 2003 (hereinafter the Act of 2003) completely debars the jurisdiction of the civil courts in matters relating to Sections 126 and 127 of the Act of 2003. For ready reference Section 145 of the Act of 2003 is reproduced hereunder :
 145. Civil court not to have jurisdiction 
 No civil court shall have jurisdiction to entertain any suit or proceeding in respect of any matter which an assessing officer referred to in section 126 or an appellate authority referred to in section 127 or the adjudicating officer appointed under this Act is empowered by or under this Act to determine and no injunction shall be granted by any court or other authority in respect of any action taken or to be taken in pursuance of any power conferred by or under this Act. 
 
 Reference has been made by the counsel for the defendant-Nigam to the judgment of the Hon ble Supreme Court in the case of Executive Engineer, Southern Electricity Supply Company of Orissa Ltd. (Southco) Anr. Vs. Sri Seetaram Rice Mill [(2012) 2 SCC 108] wherein the Hon ble Apex court has taken an expansive interpretation of Section 126 Explanation (b)(iv) of the Act of 2003 to include all manner of unauthorised use / abstraction of electricity other than the manner formalised in a contract between the licencee and the consumer. Counsel submits that the recovery of amounts for unauthorised abstraction of electrical energy with reference to Sections 126 , 127 of the Act of 2003 apply as much to theft of electrical energy as to other less grievous manner of unauthorised abstraction in contravention of conditions of contract for the supply of electrical energy between the licencee and the consumer. It is submitted that Section 135 of the Act of 2003 only entails the aggravated consequences of a criminal prosecution in specific situations of unauthorised use / abstraction of electrical energy and merely because in a given instance a case under Section 135 of the Act of 2003 may be made out, the jurisdiction of the statutory authorities under the Act of 2003 with reference to Sections 126 , 127 of the Act of 2003 to make provisional and final assessment for use of electricity cannot be excluded. He submits that in fact the first appellate court has addressed the merits of the plaintiff s case with reference to the purported non-compliance with the provisions of Section 126 of the Act of 2003 by the defendant-Nigam vitiating its action. It is submitted that even though the trial court had wrongly decided the issue of jurisdiction of the civil court in matters relating to unauthorised abstraction of electrical energy and held that the suit in a dispute relating thereto was maintainable, at the relevant time the defendant-Nigam did not challenge the finding of the trial court on the issue, as on the merits of the case the plaintiff s suit had been dismissed. It is submitted that in the circumstances thus obtaining before upsetting the findings of the learned trial court on the lack of merits in the plaintiff s case, the first appellate court ought to have considered as argued before it, preliminary the issue of lack of jurisdiction of the civil court in the matter with reference to Section 145 of the Act of 2003. It is submitted that the learned first appellate court however failed to even address the issue of the jurisdiction of the civil court before upsetting the findings of the trial court on the merit of the matter.
 Counsel for the plaintiff fairly admits that the issue of jurisdiction of the civil court has not been addressed by the first appellate court. He fairly submits that in the context of the substantial question of law as framed by this Court, the plaintiff would have no objection in the event the matter is remitted to the first appellate court for consideration of the issue of the jurisdiction of the civil court in matters relating to assessment both provisionally and finally by the defendant-Nigam for unauthorised abstraction or theft of electrical energy.
 Heard the counsel for the parties.
 In view of submissions made, the substantial question of law as framed earlier in this judgment deserves to be allowed in favour of the defendant-Nigam. In my considered opinion, the first appellate court was obliged to consider the case of the defendant-Nigam as argued before it with regard to lack of jurisdiction of civil courts in view of Section 145 of the Act of 2003. It is true that no cross appeal or cross objection against the findings of the trial court on issue No.2 relating to jurisdiction of civil court was filed by the defendant-Nigam. Yet it was open for the defendant-Nigam as the respondent-defendant in the regular first civil appeal to agitate the merits of the plaintiff s case aside of arguing that the civil courts had no jurisdiction in view of the statutory bar under the Act of 2003. This aspect of the matter has not been addressed by the first appellate court. The non-address of the jurisdictional question by the first appellate court goes to the root of the matter.
 Consequently, this second appeal is allowed. The matter is remitted / remanded to the first appellate court to decide the question of jurisdiction of the civil courts to address the issue of unlawful abstraction of electrical energy in view of the absolute exclusion of jurisdiction of civil courts under Section 145 of the Act of 2003. The first appellate court is directed to dispose of the appeal following this remand within a period of three months from the submission of a certified copy of this order. The parties are directed to appear before the first appellate court on 11.11.2013. Notice to the counsel for the parties present in court will be deemed to be notice to the parties themselves. Counsel for the parties are directed to inform their respective parties to appear before the first appellate court on 11.11.2013. 
 (ALOK SHARMA), J
MS/- All corrections made in the judgment/order have been incorporated in the judgment/order being emailed.- Manoj Solanki, Jr. P.A.