V.Swaminathan vs The Superintending Engineer on 9 February, 2018 

 Author: R.Mahadevan 

 Bench: R.Mahadevan 

 

 

BEFORE THE MADURAI BENCH OF MADRAS HIGH COURT 

DATED: 09.02.2018 

DELIVERED ON : 09.02.2018 

CORAM 

THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE R.MAHADEVAN 

W.P(MD)No.113 of 2012 
and 
M.P(MD)No.1 of 2012 

V.Swaminathan ... Petitioner 

Vs.

1.The Superintending Engineer,
 Thanjavur Electricity Distribution Circle,
 No.1, Vallam Road,
 Thanjavur - 7.

2.The Assistant Executive Engineer,
 Operation and Maintenance,
 Rural,
 TANGEDCO, 
 Kumbakonam, 
 Thanjavur District. ... Respondents

Prayer: Petition filed under Article 226 of the Constitution of India praying
for the issuance of a writ of Certiorarified Mandamus to call for the records
pertaining to the order passed by the first respondent in his proceedings in
Lr.No.SE/TEDC/TJR/AEE/GI/AE/F.Enforcement/D.2261/11, dated 12.09.2011 and 
quash the same and consequently, direct the first respondent to entertain the
appeal filed by the petitioner dated 06.09.2011.

!For Petitioner : Mr.T.A.Ebenezer 
 
^For Respondents : Mr.S.Srimathy 
 for Mr.S.M.S.Johnny Basha 
 
:ORDER 
 This writ petition has been filed seeking a writ of Certiorarified
Mandamus to call for the records pertaining to the order passed by the first
respondent in his proceedings in Lr.No.SE/TEDC/TJR/AEE/GI/ 
AE/F.Enforcement/D.2261/11, dated 12.09.2011 and quash the same and 
consequently, direct the first respondent to entertain the appeal filed by
the petitioner dated 06.09.2011.
 
 2. Heard the submissions of the learned Counsel for the petitioner as
well as the learned Standing Counsel appearing for the respondents.
 
 3. The learned Counsel for the petitioner, drawing the attention of
this Court to the typed set of documents, made the following submissions:
 3.1. According to the petitioner, he is an agriculturist and is having
agricultural electricity service connection in S.C.No.27-003-24.
 3.2. The second respondent inspected the land of the petitioner and
found that the storage tank constructed by the petitioner is used for fish
farming and came to the conclusion that the agricultural service connection
has been used for commercial purposes. 
 3.3. Accordingly, he assessed the loss of electrical energy at
Rs.59,500/- (Rupees Fifty Nine Thousand and Five Hundred only) vide order
dated 29.08.2011 and collected a sum of Rs.12,000/- (Rupees Twelve Thousand 
only).
 3.4. Aggrieved thereby, the petitioner filed an appeal before the first
respondent under Section 127 of the Electricity Act, 2003 on 06.09.2011.
 3.5. However, the first respondent vide order dated 12.09.2011,
returned the appeal papers stating that no appeal will lie against the theft
of energy.
 3.6. Reliance has also been placed upon the decision of the Honourable
Supreme Court in Southern Electricity Supply Co. of Orissa Ltd., v. Sri
Seetaram Rice Mill reported in (2012) 2 Supreme Court Cases 108 and the 
unreported decision of this Court in N.Mohammed Farook v. Union of India
[W.P(MD)No.1715 of 2011, decided on 20.02.2012]. 
 3.7. Hence, the learned Counsel for the petitioner prayed for allowing
this writ petition.
 
 4. Whereas the learned Standing Counsel appearing for the respondents,
reiterating the averments made in the counter affidavit filed by the
respondents, inter alia, contended thus:
 4.1. The electricity service connection stood in the name of the
petitioner is an agricultural electricity service connection and it is only
meant for agricultural purposes.
 4.2. During the inspection conducted by the second respondent, it is
found that the agricultural service connection obtained by the petitioner has
been used for watering the fish pond, which is a commercial activity.
 
 4.3. Hence, a notice under Section 135 of the Electricity Act, 2003 has
been issued to the petitioner alleging that the petitioner committed the
offence of theft of energy.
 4.4. Thereafter, a provisional assessment-cum-notice dated 21.05.2011
was issued directing the petitioner to pay a sum of Rs.59,500/- (Rupees Fifty
Nine Thousand and Five Hundred only); whereas the petitioner paid a sum of
Rs.19,834/- (Rupees Nineteen Thousand Eight Hundred and Thirty Four only) on 
30.05.2011.
 4.5. Thus, the respondents passed the final assessment order dated
29.08.2011, in and by which, the petitioner was directed to pay the balance
amount of Rs.39,666/- (Rupees Thirty Nine Thousand Six Hundred and Sixty Six 
only).
 4.6. Aggrieved thereby, the petitioner filed an appeal under Section
127 of the Electricity Act, 2003 before the first respondent on 06.09.2011,
however, the said appeal was not entertained for the reason that the notice
has been issued under Section 135 of the Electricity Act, 2003.
 4.7. No appeal would lie under Section 127 of the Electricity Act, 2003
challenging the notice issued under Section 135 of the said Act. 4.8.
Therefore, the notice dated 21.12.2011 came to be issued directing the
petitioner to pay the balance amount within fifteen days from the date of
receipt of the said notice.
 
 4.9. Despite the same, the petitioner paid the said amount to the
respondent - Board and hence, prayed for the dismissal of this writ petition.
 
 5. I have carefully considered the rival submissions and perused the
materials available on record.
 
 6. Before analysing the issue that arises for consideration before this
Court, it is just and proper to examine in detail the relevant provisions of
the Electricity Act, 2003 , as under:
 Section 126 :
 6.1. Part-XII of the Electricity Act, 2003 , deals with Investigation
and Enforcement. Sections 126 deals with assessment and the said Section is 
extracted hereunder:
 ? Section 126 : (Assessment):--- (1) If on an inspection of any place or
premises or after inspection of the equipments, gadgets, machines, devices
found connected or used, or after inspection of records maintained by any
person, the assessing officer comes to the conclusion that such person is
indulging in unauthorized use of electricity, he shall provisionally assess
to the best of his judgement the electricity charges payable by such person
or by any other person benefited by such use.
 (2) The order of provisional assessment shall be served upon the person
in occupation or possession or in charge of the place or premises in such
manner as may be prescribed. 
 (3) The person, on whom an order has been served under sub- section (2)
shall be entitled to file objections, if any, against the provisional
assessment before the assessing officer, who shall, after affording a
reasonable opportunity of hearing to such person, pass a final order of
assessment within thirty days from the date of service of such order of
provisional assessment of the electricity charges payable by such person.
 (4) Any person served with the order of provisional assessment, may,
accept such assessment and deposit the assessed amount with the licensee 
within seven days of service of such provisional assessment order upon him.
 (5) If the assessing officer reaches to the conclusion that
unauthorised use of electricity has taken place, the assessment shall be made
for the entire period during which such unauthorized use of electricity has
taken place and if, however, the period during which such unauthorised use of
electricity has taken place cannot be ascertained, such period shall be
limited to a period of twelve months immediately preceding the date of
inspection.
 (6) The assessment under this section shall be made at a rate equal to
twice the tariff rates applicable for the relevant category of services
specified in sub-section (5).
 Explanation.- For the purposes of this section,- (a) ?assessing
officer? means an officer of a State Government or Board or licensee, as the
case may be, designated as such by the State Government; 
 (b) ?unauthorised use of electricity? means the usage of electricity:?
 
 (i) by any artificial means; or
 (ii) by a means not authorised by the concerned person or authority or
licensee; or
 (iii) through a tampered meter; or
 (iv) for the purpose other than for which the usage of electricity was
authorised; or
 (v) for the premises or areas other than those for which the supply of
electricity was authorized.?
 
 Section 127 :
 6.2. Section 127 deals with filing of an appeal to the appellate
authority, in the event of assessment made under Section 126 of the Act and
the said Section reads as follows:
 ? Section 127 . Appeal to Appellate Authority:--- (1) Any person
aggrieved by the final order made under section 126 may, within thirty days
of the said order, prefer an appeal in such form, verified in such manner and
be accompanied by such fee as may be specified by the State Commission, to an 
appellate authority as may be prescribed.
 (2) No appeal against an order of assessment under sub-section (1)
shall be entertained unless an amount equal to 3[half of the assessed amount
is deposited in cash or by way of bank draft with the licensee and
documentary evidence of such deposit has been enclosed along with the appeal.
 (3) The appellate authority referred to in sub-section (1) shall
dispose of the appeal after hearing the parties and pass appropriate order
and send copy of the order to the assessing officer and the appellant.
 (4) The order of the appellate authority referred to in sub-section (1)
passed under sub-section (3) shall be final.
 (5) No appeal shall lie to the appellate authority referred to in sub-section (1) against the final order made with the consent of the parties.
 (6) When a person defaults in making payment of assessed amount, he, in 
addition to the assessed amount shall be liable to pay, on the expiry of
thirty days from the date of order of assessment, an amount of interest at
the rate of sixteen per cent, per annum compounded every six months.?
 
 Section 135 :
 6.3. Part XIV speaks about the offences and penalties and Section 135 
speaks about theft of electricity, which reads as follows:
 ? Section 135 . (Theft of Electricity):--- (1) Whoever, dishonestly:--
 (a) taps, makes or causes to be made any connection with overhead, 
underground or under water lines or cables, or service wires, or service
facilities of a licensee or supplier as the case may be; or
 (b) tampers a meter, installs or uses a tampered meter, current
reversing transformer, loop connection or any other device or method which
interferes with accurate or proper registration, calibration or metering of
electric current or otherwise results in a manner whereby electricity is
stolen or wasted; or
 (c) damages or destroys an electric meter, apparatus, equipment, or
wire or causes or allows any of them to be so damaged or destroyed as to
interfere with the proper or accurate metering of electricity,
 (d) uses electricity through a tampered meter; or
 (e) uses electricity for the purpose other than for which the usage of
electricity was authorised, so as to abstract or consume or use electricity
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three
years or with fine or with both: 
 Provided that in a case where the load abstracted, consumed, or used or
attempted abstraction or attempted consumption or attempted use - (i) does
not exceed 10 kilowatt, the fine imposed on first conviction shall not be
less than three times the financial gain on account of such theft of
electricity and in the event of second or subsequent conviction the fine
imposed shall not be less than six times the financial gain on account of
such theft of electricity; 
 (ii) exceeds 10 kilowatt, the fine imposed on first conviction shall
not be less than three times the financial gain on account of such theft of
electricity and in the event of second or subsequent conviction, the sentence
shall be imprisonment for a term not less than six months, but which may
extend to five years and with fine not less than six times the financial gain
on account of such theft of electricity:
 Provided further that in the event of second and subsequent conviction
of a person where the load abstracted, consumed, or used or attempted
abstraction or attempted consumption or attempted use exceeds 10 kilowatt,
such person shall also be debarred from getting any supply of electricity for
a period which shall not be less than three months but may extend to two
years and shall also be debarred from getting supply of electricity for that
period from any other source or generating station:
 Provided also that if it is proved that any artificial means or means
not authorized by the Board or licensee or supplier, as the case may be,
exist for the abstraction, consumption or use of electricity by the consumer,
it shall be presumed, until the contrary is proved, that any abstraction,
consumption or use of electricity has been dishonestly caused by such
consumer. 
 (1A) Without prejudice to the provisions of this Act, the licensee or
supplier, as the case may be, may, upon detection of such theft of
electricity, immediately disconnect the supply of electricity:
 Provided that only such officer of the licensee or supplier, as
authorized for the purpose by the Appropriate Commission or any other officer
of the licensee or supplier, as the case may be, of the rank higher than the
rank so authorised shall disconnect the supply line of electricity:
 Provided further that such officer of the licensee or supplier, as the
case may be, shall lodge a complaint in writing relating to the commission of
such offence in police station having jurisdiction within twenty four hours
from the time of such disconnection:
 Provided also that the licensee or supplier, as the case may be, on
deposit or payment of the assessed amount or electricity charges in
accordance with the provisions of this Act, shall, without prejudice to the
obligation to lodge the complaint as referred to in the second proviso to
this clause, restore the supply line of electricity within forty-eight hours
of such deposit or payment.
 (2) Any officer of the licensee or supplier as the case may be,
authorized in this behalf by the State Government may -- (a) enter, inspect,
break open and search any place or premises in which he has reason to believe
that electricity has been or is being, used unauthorisedly;
 (b) search, seize and remove all such devices, instruments, wires and
any other facilitator or article which has been, or is being, used for
unauthorized use of electricity;
 (c) examine or seize any books of account or documents which in his
opinion shall be useful for or relevant to, any proceedings in respect of the
offence under subsection (1) and allow the person from whose custody such
books of account or documents are seized to make copies thereof or take
extracts therefrom in his presence.
 (3) The occupant of the place of search or any person on his behalf
shall remain present during the search and a list of all things seized in the
course of such search shall be prepared and delivered to such occupant or
person who shall sign the list:
 Provided that no inspection, search and seizure of any domestic places
or domestic premises shall be carried out between sunset and sunrise except
in the presence of an adult male member occupying such premises. 
 (4) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure , 1973, relating to
search and seizure shall apply, as far as may be, to searches and seizure
under this Act.?
 
 Section 151 :
 6.4. Section 151 states about the cognizance of offences and it reads
as follows:
 ? Section 151 . (Cognizance of offences): No court shall take cognizance
of an offence punishable under this Act except upon a complaint in writing
made by Appropriate Government or Appropriate Commission or any of their 
officer authorized by them or a Chief Electrical Inspector or an Electrical
Inspector or licensee or the generating company, as the case may be, for this
purpose.
 Provided that the court may also take cognizance of an offence
punishable under this Act upon a report of a police officer filed under
 section 173 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973:
 Provided further that a special court constituted under section 153 
shall be competent to take cognizance of an offence without the accused being
committed to it for trial.?
 
 7. The Honourable Supreme Court, in Southern Electricity Supply Co., of
Orissa Ltd., v. Sri Seetaram Rice Mill reported in 2012 (2) SCC 108, after
considering the preamble, statement of objects, legislative history and
salient features of the Electricity Act, 2003 , explained the difference
between Section 126 and 135 of the Electricity Act. The Supreme Court has
also explained the objective difference between the aforesaid Sections, the
ambit and scope of Section 126 , with reference to the construction of words,
?unauthorised use? and ?means?, the effect and impact of change in
applicability of tariff upon the power of assessment, in accordance with the
provisions of Electricity Act, 2003 , and the relevant Regulations, pertaining
to the facts and circumstances of the reported case. The facts in nutshell in
Sri Seetaram Rice Mill s case (cited supra), are as follows:-
 The Respondent-Industry was categorised as Medium Industry Unit, which 
deals with the demand of 99 KVA and above but below 110 KVA. On inspection of 
the business premises of the respondent, the Executive Engineer has noticed
as follows: Dump of the Meter taken. Calibration of meter done and error
found within limit. If any abnormality detected in Dump, it will be intimated
later on. No further intimation was given to the respondent-Industry, as to
the finding of defects, if any, in dump. While issuing the provisional
assessment order, intimation was given that there was unauthorized use of
electricity, falling squarely within the ambit of provisions of Section 126 
of the 2003 Act. The provisional assessment order was made under Section 
126(1) of the 2003 Act, for unauthorized use of electricity and the Consumer
was required to file objections, if any, and to also pay the amount. The
relevant part of the said provisional assessment order reads as under:
 And Whereas you are entitled to file objections against the aforesaid
 - provisional assessment order under Section 126(3) of Electricity Act, 2003,
within 30 days from receipt hereof and further entitled to appear before the
undersigned for an opportunity of being heard on 25.08.2009 during working
hours from 11.00 AM to 5.00 PM. And Whereas you are further entitled u/s
126(4) to deposit the aforesaid amount within 7 days and upon such deposit
being made within 7 days, you shall not be subject to any further liability
or any action by any authority whatsoever. And Whereas if you fail to file
the objection within 30 days from receipt hereof, the undersigned shall
presume that you have no objection to the provisional assessment and the
undersigned shall proceed to pass final order u/s 126(3) on assessment of
electricity charges payable by you. And Whereas, if you fail to appear before
the undersigned at the aforesaid date and time after filing objections, if
any, the undersigned shall proceed to pass the final order under section
126(3) , based on the objection filed by you and evidence available on
record. The consumer did not file its objections/reply, but challenged the
said provisional assessment order and the intimation of unauthorized use, by
way of filing a writ petition. The said writ petition was opposed by the
Electricity Department. The High Court, while accepting the contention of the
respondent-Industry, held that overdrawal of Maximum Demand would not fall
under the scope of `unauthorized use of electricity , as defined under the
2003 Act and the appellants-Department had no jurisdiction to issue the
intimation in question and pass the assessment order, in terms of Section 126 
of the 2003 Act. Testing the same, the Southern Electricity Supply Co., of
Orissa Ltd., filed an appeal. 
 
 8. It is also relevant to extract hereunder the discussion of the
Honourable Supreme Court, on merits, on Question No.1: 
 13. On the simple analysis of the facts as pleaded by the parties, it
is contended on behalf of the respondent that the provisions of Section 126 
of the 2003 Act are not attracted and no liability could be imposed upon them
by the authorities in exercise of their power under that provision. Even if
the case advanced by the appellants against the respondent without prejudice
and for the sake of argument is admitted, even then, at best, the demand
could be raised under Regulation 82 of the Orissa Electricity Regulatory
Commission Distribution (Condition of Supply) Regulations, 2004 (for short,
 the Regulations ). But recourse to the provisions of Section 126 was
impermissible in law. The contention is that the case of a consumer consuming
the electricity in excess of maximum and the installed load does not fall
within the mischief covered under Section 126 of the 2003 Act. To put it
plainly, the argument is that the appellants lack inherent authority to raise
such demand with reference to the present case on facts and law both.
 14. On the contra, submission on behalf of the appellants is that the
case of excessive consumption of power beyond the sanctioned load would be a 
case falling within the ambit of Section 126 of the 2003 Act. Section 126 of
the 2003 Act is incapable of an interpretation which would render the said
provision otiose in cases which do not specifically fall under - Section 135 
of the 2003 Act.
 15. In order to answer these contentions more precisely, we find it
appropriate to examine the question framed above, under the following sub-headings:
 (a) Interpretation;
 (b) Distinction between Sections 126 and 135 of the 2003 Act;
 (c) The ambit and scope of Section 126 with reference to the
construction of the words `unauthorised use and means ; and

 (d) Effect and impact of change in applicability of tariff upon the
power of assessment in accordance with the provisions of the 2003 Act and the
relevant Regulations in the facts of the case.
 16. First and foremost, we have to examine how provisions like Section
126 of the 2003 Act should be construed. From the objects and reasons stated
by us in the beginning of this judgment, it is clear that `revenue focus was
one of the principal considerations that weighed with the Legislature while
enacting this law. The regulatory regime under the 2003 Act empowers the
Commission to frame the tariff, which shall be the very basis for raising a
demand upon a consumer, depending upon the category to which such consumer 
belongs and the purpose for which the power is sanctioned to such consumer.
We are not prepared to accept the contention on behalf of the respondent that
the provisions of Section 126 of the 2003 Act have to be given a strict and
textual construction to the extent that they have to be read exhaustively in
absolute terms.
 17. This is a legislation which establishes a regulatory regime for the
generation and distribution of power, as well as deals with serious fiscal
repercussions of this entire regime. In our considered view, the two maxims
which should be applied for interpretation of such statutes are ex visceribus
actus (construction of the act as a whole) and ut res magis valeat quam
pereat (it is better to validate a thing than to invalidate it). It is a
settled cannon of interpretative jurisprudence that the statute should be
read as a whole. In other words, its different provisions may have to be
construed together to make consistent construction of the whole statute
relating to the subject matter. A construction which will improve the
workability of the statute, to be more effective and purposive, should be
preferred to any other interpretation which may lead to undesirable results.
 18. It is true that fiscal and penal laws are normally construed
strictly but this rule is not free of exceptions. In given situations, this
Court may, even in relation to penal statutes, decide that any narrow and
pedantic, literal and lexical construction may not be given effect to, as the
law would have to be interpreted having regard to the subject matter of the
offence and the object that the law seeks to achieve. The provisions of
 Section 126 , read with Section 127 of the 2003 Act, in fact, becomes a code
in itself. Right from the initiation of the proceedings by conducting an
inspection, to the right to file an appeal before the appellate authority,
all matters are squarely covered under these provisions. It specifically
provides the method of computation of the amount that a consumer would be 
liable to pay for excessive consumption of the electricity and for the manner
of conducting assessment proceedings. In other words, Section 126 of the 2003
Act has a purpose to achieve, i.e., to put an implied restriction on such
unauthorized consumption of electricity. 
 
 9. After referring to many decisions, as to how, a statute should be
interpreted, the Honourable Supreme Court, at Paragraphs 22 and 23, held as
follows:
 
 22. The relevancy of objects and reasons for enacting an Act is a
relevant consideration for the court while applying various principles of
interpretation of statutes. Normally, the court would not go behind these
objects and reasons of the Act. The discussion of a Standing Committee to a
Bill may not be a very appropriate precept for tracing the legislative intent
but in given circumstances, it may be of some use to notice some discussion
on the legislative intent that is reflected in the -substantive provisions of
the Act itself. The Standing Committee on Energy, 2001, in its discussion
said, `the Committee feel that there is a need to provide safeguards to check
the misuse of these powers by unscrupulous elements . The provisions of
 Section 126 of the 2003 Act are selfexplanatory, they are intended to cover
situations other than the situations specifically covered under Section 135 
of the 2003 Act. This would further be a reason for this Court to adopt an
interpretation which would help in attaining the legislative intent.
 
 23. By applying these principles to the provisions of this case
requiring judicial interpretation, we find no difficulty in stating that the
provisions of Section 126 of the 2003 Act should be read with other
provisions, the regulations in force and they should be so interpreted as to
achieve the aim of workability of the enactment as a whole while giving it a
purposive interpretation in preference to textual interpretation. 
 

 10. While considering the distinction between 126 and 135 of the
 Electricity Act, 2003 , at Paragraphs 24 to 30, the Honourable Supreme Court,
held as follows:
 24. Upon their plain reading, the mark differences in the contents of
 Sections 126 and 135 of the 2003 Act are obvious. They are distinct and
different provisions which operate in different fields and have no common
premise in law. We have already noticed that Sections 126 and 127 of the 2003
Act read together constitute a complete code in themselves covering all
relevant considerations for passing of an order of assessment in cases which
do not fall under Section 135 of the 2003 Act. 
 25. Section 135 of the 2003 Act falls under Part XIV relating to
`offences and penalties and title of the Section is theft of electricity .
The Section opens with the words whoever, dishonestly does any or all of
the acts specified under clauses (a) to (e) of Sub-section (1) of Section 135 
of the 2003 Act so as to abstract or consume or use electricity shall be
punishable for imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years or
with fine or with both. Besides imposition of punishment as specified under
these provisions or the proviso thereto, Sub-section (1A) of Section 135 of
the 2003 Act provides that without prejudice to the provisions of the 2003
Act, the licensee or supplier, as the case may be, through officer of rank
authorized in this behalf by the appropriate commission, may immediately
disconnect the supply of electricity and even take other measures enumerated
under Sub-sections (2) to (4) of the said Section. The fine which may be
imposed under Section 135 of the 2003 Act is directly proportional to the
number of convictions and is also dependent on the extent of load abstracted.
 26. In contradistinction to these provisions, Section 126 of the 2003
Act would be applicable to the cases where there is no theft of electricity
but the electricity is being consumed in violation of the terms and
conditions of supply leading to malpractices which may squarely fall within
the expression unauthorized use of electricity . This assessment/proceedings
would commence with the inspection of the premises by an assessing officer
and recording of a finding that such consumer is indulging in an authorized
use of electricity . Then the assessing officer shall provisionally assess,
to the best of his judgment, the electricity charges payable by such
consumer, as well as pass a provisional assessment order in terms of Section
126(2) of the 2003 Act.
 27. The officer is also under obligation to serve a notice in terms of
 Section 126(3) of the 2003 Act upon any such consumer requiring him to file
his objections, if any, against the provisional assessment before a final
order of assessment is passed within thirty days from the date of service of
such order of provisional assessment. Thereafter, any person served with the
order of provisional assessment may accept such assessment and deposit the 
amount with the licensee within seven days of service of such provisional
assessment order upon him or prefer an appeal against the resultant final
order under Section 127 of the 2003 Act. The order of assessment under
 Section 126 and the period for which such order would be passed has to be in
terms of Subsections (5) and (6) of Section 126 of the 2003 Act. The
Explanation to Section 126 is of some significance, which we shall deal with
shortly hereinafter. Section 126 of the 2003 Act falls under Chapter XII and
relates to investigation and enforcement and empowers the assessing officer
to pass an order of assessment.
 28. Section 135 of the 2003 Act deals with an offence of theft of
electricity and the penalty that can be imposed for such theft. This squarely
falls within the dimensions of Criminal Jurisprudence and mens rea is one of
the relevant factors for finding a case of theft. On the contrary, Section
126 of the 2003 Act does not speak of any criminal intendment and is
primarily an action and remedy available under the civil law. It does not
have features or elements which are traceable to the criminal concept of mens
rea.
 29. Thus, it would be clear that the expression unauthorized use of
electricity under Section 126 of the 2003 Act deals with cases of
unauthorized use, even in absence of intention. These cases would certainly
be different from cases where there is dishonest abstraction of electricity
by any of the methods enlisted under Section 135 of the 2003 Act. A clear
example would be, where a consumer has used excessive load as against the 
installed load simpliciter and there is violation of the terms and conditions
of supply, then, the case would fall under Section 126 of the 2003 Act. On
the other hand, where a consumer, by any of the means and methods as 
specified under Sections 135(a) to 135(e) of the 2003 Act, has abstracted
energy with dishonest intention and without authorization, like providing for
a direct connection bypassing the installed meter.
 30. Therefore, there is a clear distinction between the cases that
would fall under Section 126 of the 2003 Act on the one hand and Section 135 
of the 2003 Act on the other. There is no commonality between them in law.
They operate in different and distinct fields. The assessing officer has been
vested with the powers to pass provisional and final order of assessment in
cases of unauthorized use of electricity and cases of consumption of
electricity beyond contracted load will squarely fall under such power. The
legislative intention is to cover the cases of malpractices and unauthorized
use of electricity and then theft which is governed by the provisions of
 Section 135 of the 2003 Act. 
 
 11. Further, while considering the acts enumerated under Section 135 of
the Electricity Act, 2003, with reference to the word dishonestly occurring
at the commencement of Section 135 of 2003 Act and the dictionary meaning of 
the word dishonest , at Paragraph 35, the Honourable Supreme Court, held as
follows:
 35. All these explanations clearly show that dishonesty is a state of
mind where a person does an act with an intent to deceive the other, acts
fraudulently and with a deceptive mind, to cause wrongful loss to the other.
The act has to be of the type stated under Sub-sections (1)(a) to (1)(e) of
 Section 135 of the 2003 Act. If these acts are committed and that state of
mind, mens rea, exists, the person shall be liable to punishment and payment
of penalty as contemplated under the provisions of the 2003 Act. In
contradistinction to this, the intention is not the foundation for invoking
powers of the competent authority and passing of an order of assessment under
 Section 126 of the 2003 Act. 
 12. With regard to the ambit and scope of Section 126 , with reference
to the words, unauthorised use and means , at Paragraphs 37 to 41, the
Supreme Court, held as follows:
 37. Wherever the assessing officer arrives at the conclusion that
unauthorized use of electricity has taken place, the assessment shall be made
for the entire period during which such unauthorized use of electricity has
taken place and if such period cannot be ascertained, it shall be limited to
a period of 12 months immediately preceding the date of inspection and the
assessment shall be made at the rate equal to twice the tariff applicable for
the relevant category of service specified under these provisions. This
computation has to be taken in terms of Sections 126(5) , 126(6) and 127 of
the 2003 Act. The complete procedure is provided under these sections. Right
from the initiation of the proceedings till preferring of an appeal against
the final order of assessment and termination thereof, as such, it is a
complete code in itself.
 38. We have already indicated that the provisions of Section 126 do not
attract the principles of Criminal Jurisprudence including mens rea. These
provisions primarily relate to unauthorized use of electricity and the
charges which would be payable in terms thereof. To determine the controversy
in the present case, it will be essential to examine the implication of the
expression unauthorised use of electricity as contained in Explanation (b)
of Section 126 of the 2003 Act.
 39. In order to explain these expressions, it will be necessary for us
to refer to certain other provisions and the Regulations as well. These
expressions have to be understood and given meaning with reference to their
background and are incapable of being fairly understood, if examined in
isolation. It is always appropriate to examine the words of a statute in
their correct perspective and with reference to relevant statutory
provisions. The expression `unauthorized use of electricity on its plain
reading means use of electricity in a manner not authorized by the licensee
of the Board. Authorization refers to the permission of the licensee to use
of electricity , subject to the terms and conditions for such use and the law
governing the subject.
 40. To put it more aptly, the supply of electricity to a consumer is
always subject to the provisions of the 2003 Act, State Acts, Regulations
framed thereunder and the terms and conditions of supply in the form of a
contract or otherwise. Generally, when electricity is consumed in violation
of any or all of these, it would be understood as `unauthorized use of
electricity . But this general view will have to be examined in the light of
the fact that the legislature has opted to explain this term for the purposes
of Section 126 of the 2003 Act.....
 41. The unauthorized use of electricity means the usage of
electricity by the means and for the reasons stated in sub-clauses (i) to (v)
of clause (b) of Explanation to Section 126 of the 2003 Act. Some of the
illustratively stated circumstances of `unauthorised use in the section
cannot be construed as exhaustive. The `unauthorized use of electricity 
would mean what is stated under that Explanation, as well as such other
unauthorized user, which is squarely in violation of the above-mentioned
statutory or contractual provisions. 
 13. After referring to the dictionary meaning of the word,
 unauthorised and considering the decision of the Apex Court in M.C.Mehta v.
Union of India reported in 2006 (3) SCC 399, at Paragraphs 44 to 52, the
Supreme Court, held as follows: 
 44. The unauthorized use of electricity in the manner as is undisputed
on record clearly brings the respondent under liability and in blame within
the ambit and scope of Section 126 of the 2003 Act. The blame is in relation
to excess load while the liability is to pay on a different tariff for the
period prescribed in law and in terms of an order of assessment passed by the
assessing officer by the powers vested in him under the provisions of Section
126 of the 2003 Act.
 45. The expression `means used in the definition clause of Section 126 
of the 2003 Act can have different connotations depending on the context in
which such expression is used. In terms of Black s Law Dictionary (Eighth
Edition) page 1001, `mean is - of or relating to an intermediate point
between two points or extremes and meaning would be `the sense of
anything, but esp. of words; that which is conveyed . The word ordinarily
includes a mistaken but reasonable understanding of a communication. `Means 
by itself is a restrictive term and when used with the word `includes , it is
construed as exhaustive. In those circumstances, a definition using the term
 means is a statement of literal connotation of a term and the courts have
interpreted `means and includes as an expression defining the section
exhaustively. It is to be kept in -mind that while determining whether a
provision is exhaustive or merely illustrative, this will have to depend upon
the language of the Section, scheme of the Act, the object of the Legislature
and its intent.
 46. Purposive construction is certainly a cardinal principle of
interpretation. Equally true is that no rule of interpretation should either
be over-stated or overextended. Without being over-extended or over-stated,
this rule of interpretation can be applied to the present case. It points to
the conclusion that an interpretation which would attain the object and
purpose of the Act has to be given precedence over any other interpretation
which may not further the cause of the statute. The development of law is
particularly liberated both from literal and blinkered interpretation, though
to a limited extent.
 47. The precepts of interpretation of contractual documents have also
undergone a wide ranged variation in the recent times. The result has been
subject to one important exception to assimilate the way in which such
documents are interpreted by judges on the common sense principle by which 
any serious utterance would be interpreted by ordinary life. In other -words,
the common sense view relating to the implication and impact of provisions is
the relevant consideration for interpreting a term of document so as to
achieve temporal proximity of the end result.
 48. Another similar rule is the rule of practical interpretation. This
test can be effectuatedly applied to the provisions of a statute of the
present kind. It must be understood that an interpretation which upon
application of the provisions at the ground reality, would frustrate the very
law should not be accepted against the common sense view which will further
such application.
 49. Once the court decides that it has to take a purposive construction
as opposed to textual construction, then the legislative purpose sought to be
achieved by such an interpretation has to be kept in mind. We have already
indicated that keeping in view the legislative scheme and the provisions of
the 2003 Act, it will be appropriate to adopt the approach of purposive
construction on the facts of this case. We have also indicated above that the
provisions of Section 126 of the 2003 Act are intended to cover the cases
over and above the cases which would be specifically covered under the
provisions of Section 135 of the 2003 Act. 50. In other words, the
purpose sought to be achieved is to ensure stoppage of misuse/unauthorized
use of the electricity as well as to ensure prevention of revenue loss. It is
in this background that the scope of the expression `means has to be
construed. If we hold that the expression `means is exhaustive and cases of
unauthorized use of electricity are restricted to the ones stated under
Explanation (b) of Section 126 alone, then it shall defeat the very purpose
of the 2003 Act, inasmuch as the different cases of breach of the terms and
conditions of the contract of supply, regulations and the provisions of the
2003 Act would escape the liability sought to be imposed upon them by the
Legislature under the provisions of Section 126 of the 2003 Act. Thus, it
will not be appropriate for the courts to adopt such an approach.
 51. The primary object of the expression `means is intended to explain
the term `unauthorized use of electricity which, even from the plain reading
of the provisions of the 2003 Act or on a common sense view cannot be
restricted to the examples given in the Explanation. The Legislature has
intentionally omitted to use the word `includes and has only used the word
`means with an intention to explain inter alia what an unauthorized use of
electricity would be. It must be noticed that clause (iv) of Explanation (b)
and sub-Section (5) of Section 126 of the 2003 Act were both amended/
substituted by the same amending Act 26 of 2007, with a purpose and object of
preventing unauthorised use of electricity not amounting to theft of
electricity within the meaning of Section 135 of the 2003 Act. This
amendment, therefore, has to be given its due meaning which will fit into the
scheme of the 2003 Act and would achieve its object and purpose.
 52. The expression `means would not always be open to such a strict
construction that the terms mentioned in a definition clause under such
expression would have to be inevitably treated as being exhaustive. There can
be a large number of cases and examples where even the expression `means can 
be construed liberally and treated to be inclusive but not completely
exhaustive of the scope of the definition, of course, depending upon the
facts of a given case and the provisions governing that law. 
 
 14. After considering K.V.Muthu v. Angamuthu Ammal reported in 1997 ( 2) 
SCC 53 and Union of India v. Prabhakaran Vijaya Kumar reported in 2008 (9)
SCC 527, at Paragraphs 58, 60 to 62, the Honourable Supreme Court explained 
the word means , as follows: 
 
 58. The above judgments clearly support the view that we have taken
with reference to the facts and law of the present case. It cannot be stated
as an absolute proposition of law that the expression `means wherever
occurring in a provision would inevitably render that provision exhaustive
and limited. This rule of interpretation is not without exceptions as there
could be statutory provisions whose interpretation demands somewhat liberal
construction and require inclusive construction. An approach or an
interpretation which will destroy the very purpose and object of the enacted
law has to be avoided. The other expressions used by the Legislature in
various sub-clauses of Explanation (b) of Section 126 of the 2003 Act are
also indicative of its intent to make this provision wider and of greater
application. Expressions like `any artificial means , `by a means not
authorised by the licensee etc. are terms which cannot be exhaustive even
linguistically and are likely to take within their ambit what is not
specifically stated. For example, `any artificial means is a generic term
and so the expression `means would have to be construed generally.
 60. The expressions `means , `means and includes and `does not
include are expressions of different connotation and significance. When the
Legislature has used a particular expression out of these three, it must be
given its plain meaning while even keeping in mind that the use of other two
expressions has not been favoured by the Legislature. To put it simply, the
Legislature has favoured non-use of such-expression as opposed to other
specific expression. In the present case, the Explanation to Section 126 has
used the word `means in contradistinction to `does not include and/or
`means and includes . This would lead to one obvious result that even the
Legislature did not intend to completely restrict or limit the scope of this
provision.
 61. Unauthorised use of electricity cannot be restricted to the stated
clauses under the explanation but has to be given a wider meaning so as to
cover cases of violation of terms and conditions of supply and the
regulations and provisions of the 2003 Act governing such supply.
`Unauthorised use of electricity itself is an expression which would, on its
plain reading, take within its scope all the misuse of the electricity or
even malpractices adopted while using electricity. It is difficult to
restrict this expression and limit its application by the categories stated
in the explanation. It is indisputable that the electricity supply to a
consumer is restricted and controlled by the terms and conditions of supply,
the regulations framed and the provisions of the 2003 Act.
 62. The requirement of grant of licence itself suggests that
electricity is a controlled commodity and is to be regulated by the
regulatory authorities. If a person unauthorisedly consumes electricity, then
he can certainly be dealt with in accordance with law and penalties may be
imposed upon him as contemplated under the contractual, regulatory and
statutory regime. The Orissa Electricity Regulatory Commission, in exercise
of its powers under Section 181(2)(t) , (v), (w) and (x) read with Part VI of
the 2003 Act, Orissa Electricity Reforms Act, 1995 and all other powers
enabling it in that behalf, made the regulations to govern distribution and
supply of electricity and procedure thereof such as system of billing,
modality of payment, the powers, functions and applications of the
distribution licensees form for supply and/or suppliers and the rights and
obligations of the consumers. These were called `Orissa Electricity
Regulatory Commission Distribution (Conditions of Supply) Code, 2004
(hereinafter referred to as `Conditions of Supply) vide notification dated
21st May, 2004. 
 
 15. The word ?dishonestly? defined in Section 24 of the Indian Penal
Code, states that, ?Whoever does anything with the intention of causing
wrongful gain to one person or wrongful loss of another person, is said to do
that thing dishonestly?. Collins English Dictionary explains the word
`dishonest as `not honest or fair; deceiving or fraudulent . Black s Law
Dictionary (Eighth Edition) explains the expression `dishonest act as a
fraudulent act, `fraudulent act being a conduct involving bad faith,
dishonesty, a lack of integrity or moral turpitude.
 
 16. In Dr.S.Dutt v. State of Uttar Pradesh reported in AIR 1966 SC 523
= (1966) 1 SCR 493, the Supreme Court has coined the word, ?dishonestly? as a 
person, who does anything with the intention of causing wrongful gain to one
person or wrongful loss to another person. In yet another decision made in
 Ramratan v. State of Bihar reported in AIR 1965 SC 926, the Supreme Court
observed as follows: 
 ?A person is said to do a thing dishonestly when he does anything with
the intention of causing wrongful gain to one person or wrongful loss to
another person. In the case of illegal seizures and impounding of cattle, the
person seizing the cattle does not gain anything. He simply takes the cattle
to the pound. He does not use them for his purpose.? 
 
 17. As per the procedure prescribed under Section 126 of the
Electricity Act, the authority, who inspects the equipments, gadgets,
machines, after inspection of any meter, maintained by any person, comes to
the conclusion that such person was indulging in unauthorized use of
electricity, he shall provisionally assess to the best of his judgement the
electricity charges payable by such person or by any other person benefited
by such use. 
 
 18. As per sub- Sections 2 to 5 of Section 126 of the Act, the order of
provisional assessment shall be served upon the person in occupation or
possession or in charge of the place or premises in such manner as may be
prescribed. The person, on whom an order has been served under sub- section
(2) shall be entitled to file objections, if any, against the provisional
assessment before the assessing officer, who shall, after affording a
reasonable opportunity of hearing to such person, pass a final order of
assessment within thirty days from the date of service of such order of
provisional assessment of the electricity charges payable by such person. Any
person served with the order of provisional assessment, may, accept such
assessment and deposit the assessed amount with the licensee within seven 
days of service of such provisional assessment order upon him. If the
assessing officer reaches a conclusion that unauthorised use of electricity
had taken place, the assessment shall be made for the entire period during
which such unauthorized use of electricity had taken place and if, however,
the period during which such unauthorised use of electricity had taken place
cannot be ascertained, such period shall be limited to a period of twelve
months immediately preceding the date of inspection. Sub-Section (6) of
 Section 126 of the Act, the assessment under the Section shall be made at a
rate equal to twice the tariff applicable for the relevant category of
services specified in sub-Section (5).
 
 19. A procedure is also contemplated in the case of theft, falling
under any of the acts, enumerated under Section 135(1)(a) to (e) of the Act.
But the said Section speaks about fine, which is as follows:
 ?(i) does not exceed 10 kilowatt, the fine imposed on first conviction
shall not be less than three times the financial gain on account of such
theft of electricity and in the event of second or subsequent conviction the
fine imposed shall not be less than six times the financial gain on account
of such theft of electricity;
 (ii) exceeds 10 kilowatt, the fine imposed on first conviction shall
not be less than three times the financial gain on account of such theft of
electricity and in the event of second or subsequent conviction, the sentence
shall be imprisonment for a term not less than six months, but which may
extend to five years and with fine not less than six times the financial gain
on account of such theft of electricity.?
 
 20. Section 135 of the Act also empowers the licencee, to immediately
disconnect the supply of electricity, upon detection of such theft of
electricity, which reads as follows:
 Provided that only such officer of the licensee or supplier, as
authorized for the purpose by the Appropriate Commission or any other officer
of the licensee or supplier, as the case may be, of the rank higher than the
rank so authorised shall disconnect the supply line of electricity:
 Provided further that such officer of the licensee or supplier, as the
case may be, shall lodge a complaint in writing relating to the commission of
such offence in police station having jurisdiction within twenty four hours
from the time of such disconnection:
 Provided also that the licensee or supplier, as the case may be, on
deposit or payment of the assessed amount or electricity charges in
accordance with the provisions of this Act, shall, without prejudice to the
obligation to lodge the complaint as referred to in the second proviso to
this clause, restore the supply line of electricity within forty-eight hours
of such deposit or payment. 
 

 21. It is the main contention of the petitioner that he had already
paid a sum of Rs.12,000/- (Rupees Twelve Thousand only) towards compounding 
fee under the threat of disconnection and further that the appellate
authority ought to have primarily decided as to whether the act of the
petitioner would amount to theft of energy or not and without following the
procedures as contemplated under the Electricity Act, 2003 , the appeal filed
by him under Section 127 of the Electricity Act, 2003, was rejected, however,
without affording any opportunity of hearing to him before passing the
impugned order and hence, prays for quashing the same. 
 
 22. In similar circumstances, this Court, in Fiem Industries Ltd. (Unit
III) rep. by its Deputy General Manager - H.R Admn., Mr.K.A.Manikandan v.
The Superintending Engineer, TANGEDCO, Krishnagiri Electricity Distribution
Circle, Dharmapuri and others [W.P.No.25849 of 2013, decided on 25.11.2013],
while elaborately dealing with the provisions of the Electricity Act, 2003 ,
has observed at paragraphs 56 to 66, as follows:
 56. When compounding of an offence is made under protest by the 
consumer, it could be argued that the consumer is not agreeable to any
provisional conclusion of theft. But the question is whether the compounding
of an offence can be made, under protest. In terms of the Hon ble Division
Bench judgment in Sri. Kamatchi Theatre s case (cited supra), compounding is
an admission of guilt, which leads to an order, granting permission to
compound, under Section 152 of the Electricity Act, 2003, which is deemed to
be an acquittal, under the said Section. But at the same time, one can
visualize the situation, at the time of inspection, where the consumer faces
the threat of disconnection, on the conclusion of theft by the authority and
he may be constrained to take a decision immediately.
 57. The assessing officer arrives at a prima facie conclusion of theft,
on the basis of evidence, recorded at the time of inspection, and at that
time, the consumer can come forward to accept the guilt of offence by
compounding the offence, under Section 152 of the Electricity Act and
thereby, avoid prosecution before the Criminal Court. Once the consumer
decides to compound the offence, there is no question of contending that the
compounding of the offence was under protest, because compounding under 
protest is not recognised in law. An offence cannot be permitted to be
compounded under protest. If the consumer protests, then it is for the
authorised officer to record such protest and lodge a complaint to the police
station, having jurisdiction. If the consumer accepts the guilt of offence
unequivocally, by compounding, the consumer can avoid prosecution. When there 
is payment of compounding fee, under protest, law does not restrict the
powers of the authorised officer to launch prosecution. In a given case, to
avoid prosecution, the consumer may come forward to remit the compounding 
fee, under protest and there is always a possibility to avoid fine, or
imprisonment on conviction, by the Court of competent criminal jurisdiction.
 
 58. Reading of the provisions, stated supra, makes it clear that there
could be two simultaneous proceedings, one for the commission of theft of
energy under Section 135 of the Act and the other, for assessment of loss to
the licencee. Section 135 of the 2003 Act deals with an offence of theft of
electricity, for which, appropriate fine or sentence on conviction, is
contemplated. This squarely falls within the dimensions of Criminal
Jurisprudence and mens rea is the relevant factor for rendering a finding on
theft. On the contrary, Section 126 of the 2003 Act read with Regulation 19 
of the Tamil Nadu Electricity Supply Code, does not speak of any criminal
intent. The assessment made is applicable under Section 127 of the Act.
Whereas, in the case of theft, though there is an assessment, as per the
procedure contained in Regulation 23-AA of the above said Code and as
provided for, in Forms 8 and 9 of Appendix to the Supply Code, there is no
appeal. If the consumer has come forward to compound the offence of theft,
there can be no appeal, on the finding of the Inspecting Officer, regarding
theft, but if the authorised officer, while computing the loss of revenue to
the licencee, commits an error in computation of the loss of assessment,
should the consumer be left without any remedy, excepting to approaching the
High Court, under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, is the question
to be decided.
 59. Inasmuch as theft of energy is punishable with variable amounts of
fine or imprisonment or both on conviction, depending upon the number of
times, the offence has been committed, by the consumer, there is possibility
of such consumer, escaping the clutches of law, by simply compounding the 
offence. Therefore, if there is a case of compounding under protest, in my
humble opinion, the authorised officer has to launch prosecution, at once.
 60. The legislative intention behind the usage of the words,
 conviction and fine in Section 135 of the Electricity Act, 2003, makes it
clear that when there is a case of theft, the authorised officer, can permit
the consumer to compound the offence and apart from that, has to make an 
assessment of loss of revenue to the licencee and while doing so, has to
follow the procedure and the method in arriving at the loss, as stated supra.
 61. It could be deduced from the reading of the provisions, the matter
pertains to the assessment of loss to the supplier or licencee, is quasi-judicial, whereas, the aspect of punishing the consumer, for an offence,
under Section 135 of the Act, is judicial. The authorised officer is not
empowered to convict the consumer for theft, but he has power to accept the
compounding by the consumer, as per Section 152 of the Electricity Act, 2003,
which states that, notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal
Procedure 1973, the appropriate Government or any officer authorized by it in
this behalf may accept from any consumer or person who committed or who is 
reasonably suspected of having committed an offence of theft of electricity
punishable under this Act, a sum of money by way of compounding of the 
offence as given in the Table thereunder. Both under Sections 126 and 135 of
the Electricity Act, 2003, while making an assessment of loss, the function
of the assessing officer is quasi-judicial. When the consumer is given a
right of appeal against the final assessment order under Section 126 of the
Act, then if such quasi-judicial authority, under Section 135 of the
Electricity Act, on his own motion, arrives at a provisional conclusion of
theft of electrical energy and proceed to make an assessment, as per
Regulation 23-AA of the Supply Code, 2004, the consumer should equally be 
provided with an opportunity of challenging the assessment made by the quasi-judicial authority. If there is a case of compounding, then the Consumer
should not be permitted to canvass on the correctness of the finding of guilt
or on the ground that he was compelled to compound under protest. Once option 
is exercised by the consumer to compound the offence, there is no question of
retracting the same.
 62. It is well settled that judicial review under Article 226 of the
Constitution of India, is circumscribed only to the decision making process
and not the decision, arrived at on the basis of some evidence, based on the
principles of preponderance of probability and the findings, cannot be re-appreciated and substituted by this Court, more so, when there is admission
of theft. If the contentions of the respondents, particularly, the
Superintending Engineer, Tamil Nadu Generation and Distribution Corporation
Ltd., Krishnagiri Electricity Distribution Circle, Dharmapuri, 1st
respondent, to the effect that no appeal remedy is available under the
Statute to the consumer, enabling the aggrieved person to challenge the
assessment, then the High Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of
India, would be burdened with the writ petitions, arising out of any order,
passed by the assessing officer, either provisional or final, as the case may
be.
 63. Electricity Act, 2003 confers powers on the Tamil Nadu Electricity
Regulatory Commission to frame regulations. Accordingly, Regulation 23-AA has 
been framed by the Tamil Nadu Electricity Regulatory Commission, Chennai, 
devising a procedure for passing a provisional assessment order and after
affording an opportunity of hearing to the consumer, to pass a final
assessment order, even in the case of theft. In the case of compounding of an
offence, punishable under Section 135(1)(a) to (e) of the Electricity Act,
2003 , the Special Court, in exercise of powers under Section 153 , is also
empowered to determine the civil liability, on the consumer. The terms on
which the Special Court determines the civil liability on the consumer is
almost the same, as contained in Regulation 23-AA of the Code. As per sub-Clauses 5 and 6 of Section 153 of the Act, civil liability that could be
determined by the Special Court and they are as follows:
 (5) In cases of theft by direct tapping from the licensee s lines,
cables or electrical plant of the licensee, if the accused person
unauthorizedly connects or reconnects any meter of the licensee in a
disconnected service, then electric supply to such premises or place shall be
disconnected forthwith by the licensee concerned. The licensee concerned may 
subsequently remove or divert or convert his line, cable or electrical plant
to prevent further theft of electricity provided that such action shall not
result in any inconvenience in affording quality supply or disruption of
supply, to other consumers.
 (6) The authorized officer and any other officer of the licensee
concerned who accompanied the authorized officer shall sign the inspection
report in all the above cases and obtain signatures of the accused person or
his representative and the same must be handed over to the accused person or
his representative at site immediately under proper receipt. In case of
refusal by the accused person either to sign or accept or give a receipt, a
copy of inspection report must be pasted at a conspicuous place in or outside
the premises and a note recorded on the office copy of the inspection report
to the effect that the copy of the report has been pasted at the conspicuous
place of the premises. A copy of the report shall be subsequently sent to the
accused person of the premises under registered post within three days of
inspection. 
 64. Insofar as the determination of the civil liability by the Special
Court, is concerned, or for the matter, imposition of appropriate fine or
imprisonment, as the case may be, depending upon the repetition of the
offence, the person aggrieved over the determination of the civil liability
or fine or imprisonment or both, as the case may be, is given a right to
challenge the same before the Court of competent jurisdiction under the
provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure . There may be instances, where
the assessing officer or the Special Court, as the case may be, commit an
error in the manner of assessment or determination of civil liability.
Evidence adduced, on behalf of the consumer, would not have been considered 
in proper perspective or overlooked, resulting in miscarriage of justice. In
such an event, when the aggrieved consumer, is at liberty to challenge the
civil liability, determined by the Special Court, before the High Court, then
the consumer, who has avoided prosecution, by compounding the offence, paid 
the compounding fee, should also be permitted to test the correctness of the
manner of computation of the civil liability, when such civil liability is
fastened on the consumer by the assessing officer. As such, there is no
provision in the Electricity Act, 2003 or Supply Code framed by the
Regulatory Authority, to question the manner of computation of civil
liability or in other words, the final assessment order. As observed earlier,
assessment of the civil liability or loss caused to the licencee, is made
after considering the objections of the consumers and evidence, if any,
adduced. The material evidence adduced by the department is also relevant at
the time of assessment.
 65. Writ jurisdiction does not ordinarily deal with the questions of
fact and more particularly, when a finding is recorded by the Original
Authority. Judicial review is restricted to the decision making process or
the challenges to perversity, violation of principles of natural justice or
lack of jurisdiction. If there is an error or illegality committed by the
authority in the method, while arriving at the assessment or for any of the
reasons, stated supra, there should be a forum constituted under the Act or
the Supply Code, to challenge the assessment. But as stated supra, the
consumer, having compounded the offence, should not be permitted to 
challenge, the aspect of his act of compounding. Apparently, there is no such
forum constituted under the Act or in the Regulations framed under Regulation
23-AA of the Tamil Nadu Electricity Supply Code, 2004. There is causus
ommisus in the Statute as well as in the Supply Code. Therefore, this Court
is inclined to suggest to the Court of Tamil Nadu Energy Department, Chennai,
or the Tamil Nadu Regulatory Commission to make a provision, constituting an
authority, before whom, the final assessment made under Section 135 of the
Act, can also be tested.
 66. In the light of the above discussion, as compounding under protest
is not acceptable, the respondents are at liberty to proceed further in
accordance with law. However, this Court is inclined to direct the
respondents to initiate proceedings, as contemplated under Regulation 23-AA
of the Tamil Nadu Electricity Supply Code, 2004, pursuant to the proceedings
of the 3rd respondent, dated 25.09.2012 and 26.09.2012 and pass orders, after
affording opportunity to the petitioner, within a period of two months, from
the date of receipt of a copy of this order. 
 
 23. Keeping in mind the aforesaid decision of this Court and on a
careful scrutiny of the materials placed before this Court and also in the
light of the aforesaid discussions, this Court is of the considered opinion
that whether the act of the petitioner would amount to theft of energy or
not, cannot be adjudicated by this Court in exercise of the powers under
 Article 226 of the Constitution of India and it is for the appellate
authority to look into the same and pass a reasoned order either to entertain
or reject the appeal preferred by the petitioner, but the impugned order has
been passed by the first respondent by merely stating that the appeal is not
maintainable without affording any opportunity of hearing to the petitioner
and thus, on that ground alone, the impugned order warrants interference.
 
 24. Accordingly, the impugned order passed by the first respondent in
his proceedings in Lr.No.SE/TEDC/TJR/AEE/GI/AE/F.Enforcement/D.2261/11, dated 
12.09.2011, is quashed and the matter is remitted to the first respondent for
fresh consideration. On such remand, the first respondent shall consider the
claim of the petitioner in the light of the provisions of the Electricity
Act, 2003 and pass appropriate orders on merits and in accordance with law,
after affording due opportunity of personal hearing to the petitioner, within
a period of twelve weeks from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
 
 25. In fine, this writ petition is allowed to the extent indicated
above. No costs. Consequently, the connected miscellaneous petition is
closed.
 
 To:
 
 1.The Superintending Engineer,
 Thanjavur Electricity Distribution Circle,
 No.1, Vallam Road,
 Thanjavur - 7.
 
 2.The Assistant Executive Engineer,
 Operation and Maintenance,
 Rural,
 TANGEDCO, 
 Kumbakonam, 
 Thanjavur District.
 .
