Md. Abdul Matin vs The West Bengal State Electricity on 18 April, 2023 

 Author: Sabyasachi Bhattacharyya 

 Bench: Sabyasachi Bhattacharyya 

 In the High Court at Calcutta

 Constitutional Writ Jurisdiction

 Appellate Side

The Hon ble Justice Sabyasachi Bhattacharyya

 W.P.A. No. 6237 of 2022
 Md. Abdul Matin
 Vs.
 The West Bengal State Electricity
 Distribution Company Limited others

 With

 W.P.A. No. 10861 of 2022

 Sunil Das
 Vs.
 The West Bengal State Electricity
 Distribution Company Limited others

 With

 W.P.A. No. 6112 of 2022

 Azad Ali and others
 Vs.
 The West Bengal State Electricity
 Distribution Company Limited others

 With

 W.P.A. No. 7548 of 2022
 GurucharanOjha
 Vs.
 The West Bengal State Electricity
 Distribution Company Limited others

 With

 W.P.A. No. 7652 of 2022

 Md. Azharuddin @ Azheruddin
 Vs.
 The West Bengal State Electricity
 Distribution Company Limited others

 For the petitioners
 in all the matters : Mr. Ashok Gupta,
 Mr. Sailesh Kumar Gupta

 For the State in
 WPA No.6112 of 2022 : Mr. Amit Prokash Lahiri,
 Mr. Shuvro Prokash Lahiri

 For the State in
 WPA No.6237 of 2022 : Ms. Jyotsna Roy Mukherjee

 For the State in
 WPA No.7652 of 2022 : Mr. Bibek Jyoti Basu,
 Mr. Debanjan Chatterjee

 For the Union of India : Mr. Dhiraj Kr. Trivedi,
 Mr. Ravi Ranjan Kumar

 For the WBSEDCL in
 WPA No.6237 of 2022,
 WPA No.10861 of 2022,
 WPA No. 6112 of 2022 and
 WPA No.7584 of 2022 : Mr. Srijan Nayak,
 Mrs. Rituparna Maitra

 For the WBSEDCL in
 WPA No.7652 of 2022 : Mr. Srijan Nayak,
 Mr. Sujit Sankar Koley

 For the CESC Limited : Mr. Om Narayan Rai,
 Mr. Debanjan Mukherji

 Hearing concluded on : 16.02.2023

 Judgment on : 18.04.2023

 Sabyasachi Bhattacharyya, J:-

1. The writ petitioners in all the matters have challenged the vires of

 Sections 126 and 135 of the Electricity Act, 2003 (hereinafter referred

 to as the 2003 Act ).

2. Learned counsel for the petitioners cite several judgments, which will

 be discussed presently. It is argued that Section 126 (1) provides for a

 mere provisional assessment which, however, is conclusive as to the

 allegation of theft of electricity against the accused, without granting

 the accused person any opportunity of hearing. Such serious

 allegation, which is a stigma and has far-reaching criminal

 consequences against the accused person as well, is thus examined

 and decided by the same person who gave the report. There is no trial

 before a competent judicial forum, with due opportunity of leading

 evidence and cross-examination being given to the accused. Thus, it is

 argued, the said section is violative of Articles 19 and 21 of the

 Constitution of India and is, thus, ultra vires the Constitution.

3. Such assessment, both at the provisional and the final stage, are done

 by the Assessing Officer, who is generally an employee of the

 distribution licensee. It is the same officer who submits a report, on

 inspection, as to the unauthorised use of electricity by the consumer

 or person concerned and thereafter assesses the amount chargeable

 as electricity dues. Again, the same officer hears the person concerned

 and arrives at the final assessment. Thus, it is argued, the Assessing

 Officer, who is an employee of the licensee, acts as the judge, jury and

 executioner. The final order is a merely mechanical reiteration of the

 provisional order of assessment, without any independent application

 of mind or examination worth the name.

4. Although labelled as assessment orders , no reasons are given by the

 assessing officer who, in any event, is an agent of the licensee and is

 not a competent judicial officer. Assessment bills are sent by the

 licensee which, under no stretch of imagination, qualify as orders as

 contemplated in Section 126 , thus rendering the entire process an

 eye-wash. The reasons , if any, are mere pretence of reasons - a

 mechanical rubber-stamp exercise without consideration of relevant

 documents and evidence.

5. The appeal provided under Section 127 of the 2003 Act against the

 final order, it is argued by the petitioners, is a farce, since the accused

 person does not have proper opportunity to represent his case before

 the first forum.

6. Moreover, the pre-condition of deposit of 50 per cent of the total

 assessed account, which may be exorbitant and arbitrary, for

 preferring an appeal under Section 127 renders the said remedy

 illusory.

7. Learned counsel for the petitioner next argues that Section 135 of the

 2003 Act provides for criminal proceedings before a Special Court.

 However, the definition of theft in the said section and that of

 unauthorised use in Section 126 overlap largely, particularly insofar

 as the allegation of tampering of meter is concerned. As a

 consequence, the licensees can pick and choose to enforce different

 penal consequences against persons accused of the same or similar

 offences at their own sweet whims. The consequences range between

 payment of huge sums of money and disconnection of electricity, as

 well as imprisonment and/or fine.

8. Hence, it is argued, Section 135 , which provides for the harsher

 punishment, ought to be struck down as ultra vires.

9. Learned counsel for the petitioners cites several judgments,including

 Executive Engineer, Southern Electricity Company of Orissa Limited

 (SOUTHCO) and another Vs. Sri Seetaram Rice Mill, reported at (2012) 2

 SCC 108, Laxmi Chand and others Vs. Gram Panchyat, Kararia and

 others, reported at AIR 1996 SC 523, etc., to argue that the

 extraordinary jurisdiction of the High Court under Article 226 of the

 Constitution can be exercised in appropriate cases despite availability

 of an alternative remedy. Whirlpool Corporation s judgment reported at

 (1998) 8 SCC 1 is also referred in such context along with Calcutta

 Discount Co. Ltd. Vs. Income Tax Officer, Companies District I Calcutta

 and another, reported at AIR 1961 SC 372.

10. Learned counsel cites Kotak Mahindra Bank Limited Vs. A.

 Balakrishnan and another, reported at (2022) 9 SCC 186, for

 contending that a judgment on different material facts gives rise to

 different and distinct principles of law. In the Gujarat Division Bench

 judgment cited by the CESC Limited, it is argued that theft or

 pilferage of electricity was not an issue.

11. Escorts Ltd. Vs. Commissioner of Central Excise, Delhi-II, reported at

 (2004) 8 SCC 335, also held in similar lines.

12. Learned counsel for the petitioner then cites Suraj Mall Mohta and Co.

 Vs. A.V. VisvanathaSastri and another, reported at AIR 1954 SC 545 to

 argue that as per Article 14 of the Constitution, in its application to

 legal proceedings, everyone should be assured the same rules of

 evidence and mode of procedure. Such principle is reiterated by

 placing reliance on Chandra Bhavan Boarding and Lodging Bangalore

 Vs. State of Mysore and another, reported at AIR 1970 SC 2042, K.S.

 Rashid Vs. Income Tax Officer, reported at AIR 1964 SC 1190, Shree

 Meenakshi Mills Ltd., Madurai Vs. Sri A.V. Visvanatha Sastri and

 another, reported at AIR 1955 SC 13 and P.N. Kaushal and others Vs.

 Union of India and others, reported at AIR 1978 SC 1457.

13. Hence, it is submitted that Section 135(1) of the 2003 Act is ultra-vires, as Article 19(1)(g) of the Constitution is violated due to

 unbridled power being conferred on the licensee-Authority to invoke

 the provisions of Section 126 or the provisions of Section 135 of the

 2003 Act in cases of theft and/or pilferage of electricity as also

 unauthorised use of electricity, depending upon the colour of the

 hair of the consumer.

14. Sri Seetaram Rice Mill s case (supra) is cited to show that Sections 126 

 and 135 are distinct and different provisions operating in different

 fields and having no common premise in law. Hence, Section 126 and

 127 of the 2003 Act constitute a complete code in themselves, as

 assessment made thereunder does not fall under Section 135 of the

 2003 Act. Section 126 would be applicable only to cases where there

 is no theft of electricity.

15. Learned counsel for the petitioner cites Bhagwandas Tiwari Vs. State

 of M.P. and others, reported at AIR 2011 MP 71, to argue that civil

 liability determined by the Special Court is dependent upon the

 criminal liability. Only upon the order of assessment being finally

 passed and served upon the consumer, the consumer is expected to

 pay the charges.

16. Next citing an unreported judgment of a co-ordinate Bench of this

 Court in Gouri Sankar Roy Vs. South Bengal State Transport, learned

 counsel reiterates such proposition. It was held thereinthat recovery

 of dues purely on account of theft has to be made by taking recourse

 to the provision of Section 154 of the 2003 Act but, if the provisional

 assessment order was for the pre-theft period, the recovery would be

 under Section 126 .

17. Learned counsel for the petitioner, placing reliance on the judgment of

 M/s. J.T.G. Alloys vs. Punjab State Power Corporation, argues that

 cases of theft falling under the ambit of Section 135 do not have any

 applicability of Section 126 .

18. In Kerala State Electricity Board Vs. Thomas Joseph, passed on

 December 12, 2022, the Supreme Court again reiterated that Section

 126 is intended to cover situations other than those specifically

 covered under Section 135 of the 2003 Act.

19. Learned counsel for the petitioner next cites Anita Kushwaha Vs.

 Pushap Sudan, reported at AIR 2016 SC 3506, a Constitution Bench

 judgment of the Supreme Court, which held that access to justice has

 been recognized to be a part of the right to life in India and in all

 civilised societies around the globe. Learned counsel submits that

 right to life guaranteed under Article 21 , as well as Article 14 of the

 Constitution, which ensures equality before law and equal protection

 of law, are violated by the provisions-in-question. The consumers 

 right to access civil courts is deprived by Section 126 of the 2003 Act,

 which infringes the said fundamental rights. The decisions cited by

 the WBSEDCL, it is argued, are ex facie per incuriam in view of the

 Three-Judge bench decision of the Supreme Court in Kotak Mahindra

 Bank Limited (supra), read with Sri Seetaram Rice Mill s case.

20. It is submitted that the Apex Court, in Orion Metal (P) Ltd. (supra), has

 misconstrued and/or misread the ratio of law laid down in Sri

 Seetaram Rice Mill s case. Regarding per incuriam decisions, the

 petitioners cite Secretary to Government of Kerala, Irrigation

 Department and others Vs. James Varghese and others, reported at

 2022 SCC OnLine SC 545. It is submitted that the principle of Audi

 Alteram Partem has been violated by the provisions-in-question.

21. Learned counsel further places reliance on several judgments in the

 context of Article 14 of the Constitution.

22. Citing AIR 1990 SC 882 [Municipal Corporation of Delhi Vs. Ajanta Iron

 and Steel Company (Private) Limited, it is argued by the petitioner that

 the allegation of theft cannot be assumed to be correct without

 full-fledged trial on the issue. In the judgment reported at(2011) 8

 SCC 695 [Oriental Bank of Commerce and another Vs. R.K. Uppal], it

 was observed by the Supreme Court that a quasi-judicial authority is

 expected to apply its judicial mind to the issues involved, which is not

 possible if the assessing officer envisaged under Section 126 can also

 be an employee of the licensee.

23. By relying on a Division Bench judgment of this Court reported at

 (2011) 4 CHN 204 [W.B. State Electricity Distribution Company Limited

 Vs. Jadavpur Tea Co. Ltd.], it is submitted that the complainant

 cannot be the prosecutor and the judge at the same time. In this

 context, BhajanLal, Chief Minister, Haryana Vs. M/s. Jindal Strips

 Limited and others, reported at (1994) 6 SCC 19,is referred to. If

 exorbitant amounts are assessed under Section 126 , the right of

 appeal under Section 127 of the 2003 Act becomes illusory since fifty

 per cent of the exorbitant amount then has to be deposited as pre-condition for preferring the appeal.

24. The petitioners next cite Mardia Chemicals Ltd. and others Vs. Union of

 India and others, reported at (2004) 4 SCC 311, where it was held that

 the deposit of seventy-five per cent of the claim as pre-condition for

 preferring an appeal under Section 17 of the Securitisation and

 Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security

 Interest Act, 2002 was oppressive, onerous and arbitrary. It is

 submitted that, similarly, the pre-condition of deposit of fifty per cent

 of the assessed amount as pre-condition for preferring an appeal

 under Section 127 of the 2003 Act, coupled with the fact that Section

 145 of the 2003 Act deprives consumers from approaching civil

 courts, is equally oppressive.

25. Due to non-application of mind while passing the final order of

 assessment by the assessing officer without considering the relevant

 documents and with a pre-disposed mind tantamounts to non-application of mind, which renders the assessment without

 jurisdiction. In support of such contention, learned counsel cites

 Tamilnad Mercantile Bank Shareholders Welfare Association Vs. S.C.

 Sekar and others, reported at (2009) 2 SCC 784 and Oryx Fisheries (P)

 Ltd. Vs. Union of India, reported at (2010) 13 SCC 427.

26. An exercise without jurisdiction is a nullity and does not exist in the

 eye of law, it is contended. Learned counsel also relies on a co-ordinate Bench judgment in W.B. State Electricity Distribution

 Company Limited Vs. Jadavpur Tea Co. Ltd., reported at (2011) 4 CHN

 204 to argue that the decision of the authority is with a closed mind,

 as only the amounts suffered by the WBSEDCL are calculated.

27. It is submitted that the assessment orders are made only on the basis

 of materials known to the authorities, copies of which are not given to

 the consumer. Hence, the principles of natural justice and fair play

 are violated as per Kothari Filaments and another Vs. Commissioner of

 Customs (Port), Kolkata and others, reported at (2009) 2 SCC 192.

28. It is submitted that there cannot be any estoppel against the statute

 and even consent of parties cannot confer jurisdiction on an authority

 lacking inherent jurisdiction. By placing reliance on The King Emperor

 Vs. Khawaja Nazir Ahmed, reported at AIR 1945 PC 18, it is argued

 that if a statute permits an authority to act in a particular way, the

 act must be done in that way or should not be done at all. Here, if the

 assessing officer comes to the conclusion that he is unable to arrive at

 any conclusion as to the period of such unauthorised use, the

 calculations in terms of Section 126(5) are arbitrary and perverse.

 Articles 21 and 22 of the Constitution, it is argued, demand a fair and

 just investigation by the investigating officer and a fair trial by the

 courts, which is negated in cases of provisional and final orders of

 assessment under Section 126 .

29. The plinth of the State s submission is that where the law itself be fair

 on its face and impartial in appearance, yet, if it is applied and

 administered by a public authority with an evil eye and an unequal

 hand so as to make unjust and illegal discrimination between persons

 in similar circumstances, material to their rights, the denial of equal

 justice is still within the prohibition of the Constitution.

30. In support of the proposition, learned counsel for the State places

 reliance on the United States Supreme Court judgment of YickWo v.

 Hopkins, Sheriff, etc. [ (1886) SCC On Line US SC 188 ]. On such

 ground, the petitioners therein were discharged from custody and

 imprisonment since the US Supreme Court came to the finding that

 there was discrimination due to hostility to the petitioners race and

 nationality.

31. It is argued by the State that there is no such instance of arbitrariness

 or discrimination in the present cases on the part of the State

 authorities or the WBSEDCL, for which the State refutes the challenge

 to the vires of Sections 126 and 135 .

32. Learned counsel for the WBSEDCL highlights the necessity of

 enunciating the new Electricity Act, 2003 , which has progressive

 features and seeks to strike the right balance between economic

 profitability and public purpose in the context of current realities in

 the Indian power sector.

33. Learned counsel distinguishes between Part XII of the 2003 Act, which

 contains provisions for inspection, assessment bill and appeal under

 Sections 126 and 127 of the Act, and Part XIV, which deals with

 penalty and punishment and includes Section 135 .

34. Under Section 154 , Special Courts have been designated to determine

 criminal as well as civil liabilities.

35. Whereas Section 126 deals with unauthorized use of electricity and

 civil liabilities, Section 127 provides for appeal against the final

 assessment upon compliance with principles of Natural Justice.

36. Section 135 , on the other hand, deals with criminal liabilities.

37. Unauthorised use of electricity contemplated under Section 126 is of

 much wider connotation than the limited definition of theft under

 Section 135 , it is submitted, and the standards of proof in deciding

 the two are distinct. The two operate on separate legal footings and

 there is no scope of pick and choose by the authorities.

38. It is submitted that the petitioners in all the matters participated in

 hearing and only thereafter the final assessments were made.

 Therefore, there has been no violation of any principle of Natural

 Justice.

39. The WBSEDCL cites Cal. Electric Supply Corpn. Ltd. and another Vs.

 Kalavanti Doshi Trust and others, reported at (2011) 1 CHN 182 for the

 proposition that if on the date of presentation of the writ petition the

 remedy of the petitioners was totally barred, the writ court ought not

 to invoke its jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.

40. It is submitted that in Sri Seetaram Rice Mill s Case, which was also

 followed by a Division Bench of the Punjab and Haryana High Court in

 LPA 1900 of 2011, there is a clear distinction between cases under

 Section 126 on the one hand and Section 135 on the other. There is

 no commonality between them in law and they operate in distinct

 fields.

41. Learned counsel for the WBSEDCL also cites M/s. Orion Metals (supra)

 to argue that all instances of unauthorised use of energy may not

 amount to theft under Section 135 of the 2003 Act, but theft falls

 within the definition of unauthorised use of electricity as envisaged in

 Section 126 . It is clear from Section 154 of the Act that a Special

 Court is designated for such purpose and is empowered to determine

 criminal proceedings as well as civil liability under Section 154(5) .

 Section 154(6) , it is argued, provides for refund in case of excess

 payment.

42. The validity of Sections 126 and 135 of the 2003 Act came up for

 consideration before a Division Bench of the Gujarat High Court in

 Ranchhod Bhai Vs. Union of India, where the vires of Sections 126 and

 135 was upheld. In Satish Babubhai Patel as well, the Division Bench

 of the Gujarat High Court in another case upheld the validity of

 Sections 126 and 135 of the 2003 Act.

43. In Duraisami Vs. Assistant Executive Engineer, the Madras High Court

 held that demand made by the licensee in case of a theft of electrical

 energy, where there is some material remedy, does not render the

 relevant provisions of the 2003 Act ultravires.

44. Learned Counsel for the WBSEDCL also seeks to distinguish the

 judgments cited by the petitioners.

45. Although initially not a party to the writ petitions, the CESC Limited,

 which is also one of the largest distribution companies in West Bengal

 along with the WBSEDCL and is a stake-holder in the challenge to the

 vires of Sections 126 and 135 of the 2003 Act, seeks to be heard on

 the challenge to the vires. Hence, for a complete adjudication on the

 issue, the CESC is heard.

46. Learned counsel for the CESC submits that the 2003 Act was enacted

 for the reason of ensuring better regulatory, supervisory and revenue

 recovery system, as expressed in the objects and reasons of the 2003

 Act, for which there was definite concerted effort in preventing

 unauthorised use of electricity on the one hand and theft on the other.

 For such proposition, learned counsel relies on Executive Engineer,

 Southern Electricity Supply Co. of Orissa Ltd. V. Sri Seetaram Rice Mill,

 reported at (2012) 2 SCC 108.

47. By placing reliance on the statement of objects and reasons for

 enacting the 2003 Act, learned counsel for the CESC stresses that

 provisions relating to theft of electricity have a revenue focus, which

 was also spelt out in WBSEDCL v. Orion Metal (P) Ltd., reported at

 (2020)18 SCC 588.

48. Learned counsel next cites Satish Babubhai Patel v. Union of India

 Ors., reported at 2013 SCC OnLine Guj 8680, where the Gujarat High

 Court upheld the vires of Sections 126 and 135 . Hence, it is argued,

 the issue is no longer res integra.

49. Next relying on Union of India v. Vipan Kumar Jain [ (2005) 9 SCC 579],

 learned counsel for the CESC contends that there is nothing

 inherently unconstitutional in permitting the assessing officer, who is

 an employee of the licensee, to gather information and assess the

 value of the information himself.

50. Learned counsel then cites Executive Engineer, Southern Electricity

 Supply Company of Orissa Limited (SOUTHCO) Anr. V. Sri Seetaram

 Rice Mill, reported at (2012) 2 SCC 108, and WBSEDCL and Others v.

 Orion Metal Private Limited and Another [ (2020) 18 SCC 588 ], to

 distinguish between Sections 126 and 135 and argues that there is no

 commonality between them in law. They operate in different and

 distinct fields and operate parallelly. The argument that Section 135 

 provides for harsher penalties is not tenable in the eye of law, since

 proceedings under the two provisions have different scopes.

51. It is further argued that the provisions of Sections 126 and 127 of the

 2003 Act constitute between themselves a complete code in itself.

 Section 126 has a purpose to achieve, that is, to put an implied

 restriction on unauthorised consumption of electricity.

52. To test the constitutionality of an enactment, the CESC argues that its

 true nature and character, the area in which it is intended to operate,

 its purport and intent have to be determined. Moreover, it must be

 presumed that every statute is constitutionally valid. On these

 propositions, learned counsel cites HamdardDawakhana v. Union of

 India, reported at AIR 1960 SC 554.

53. Learned counsel contends that the petitioners have challenged the

 vires of Sections 126 and 135 two decades after the enactment of the

 2003 Act, during which period the provisions withstood the test of

 time. Moreover, the challenge to the vires of the said provisions has

 already been negated by the Gujarat High Court.

54. Citing PGF Ltd. V. Union of India, reported at (2015) 13 SCC 50, it is

 contended that the Supreme Court noted that on very many occasions

 a challenge to a provision of law, as to its constitutionality, with a view

 to thwart the applicability and rigour of those provisions,serves as an

 escape route from the applicability of those provisions of law and

 thereby create an impediment for the authorities and the institutions

 concerned. The Court, while deciding such challenge, should also

 examine the extent of financial implications by virtue of the operation

 of the provision vis-à-vis the State and alleged extent of sufferance by

 the person who seeks to challenge based on the alleged invalidity of

 the provision with particular reference to the vires.

55. Sections 126 and 135 have been introduced in tune with the will of

 the people and are aimed at enhancing recovery of lost revenue and

 minimizing revenue loss.

56. For a complete adjudication on the vires of Sections 126 and 135in

 the context of Section 154 , the exact content of the said provisions is

 required to be set out:

 126. Assessment.--(1) If on an inspection of any place or premises or after
 inspection of the equipments, gadgets, machines, devices found connected or
 used, or after inspection of records maintained by any person, the assessing
 officer comes to the conclusion that such person is indulging in unauthorised
 use of electricity, he shall provisionally assess to the best of his judgment the

electricity charges payable by such person or by any other person benefited by
such use.
 (2) The order of provisional assessment shall be served upon the person
in occupation or possession or in charge of the place or premises in such
manner as may be prescribed.
 (3) The person, on whom an order has been served under sub-section
(2), shall be entitled to file objections, if any, against the provisional
assessment before the assessing officer, who shall, after affording a
reasonable opportunity of hearing to such person, pass a final order of
assessment within thirty days from the date of service of such order of
provisional assessment, of the electricity charges payable by such person.
 (4) Any person served with the order of provisional assessment may,
accept such assessment and deposit the assessed amount with the licence
within seven days of service of such provisional assessment order upon him:
 (5) If the assessing officer reaches to the conclusion that unauthorised
use of electricity has taken place, the assessment shall be made for the entire
period during which such unauthorised use of electricity has taken place and
if, however, the period during which such unauthorised use of electricity has
taken place cannot be ascertained, such period shall be limited to a period of
twelve months immediately preceding the date of inspection.
 (6) The assessment under the section shall be made at a rate equal to
twice the tariff applicable for the relevant category of services specified in sub-section (5).
 Explanation.--For the purposes of this section,--
 (a) assessing officer means an officer of a State Government or
Board or licensee, as the case may be, designated as such by the State
Government;
 (b) Unauthorised use of electricity means the usage of electricity--
 (i) by any artificial means; or
 (ii) by means not authorised by the concerned person or authority
 or licensee; or
 (iii) through a tampered meter; or
 (iv) for the purpose other than for which the usage of electricity was
 authorised; or
 (v) for the premises or areas other than those for which the supply
 of electricity was authorised.

135. Theft of electricity.--1) Whoever, dishonestly,--

 (a) taps, makes or causes to be made any connection with overhead,
underground or underwater lines or cables, or service wires, or service
facilities of a licensee or supplier, as the case may be; or

 (b) tampers a meter, installs or uses a tampered meter, current reversing
transformer, loop connection or any other device or method which interferes
with accurate or proper registration, calibration or metering of electric current
or otherwise results in a manner whereby electricity is stolen or wasted; or

 (c) damages or destroys an electric meter, apparatus, equipment, or wire
or causes or allows any of them to be so damaged or destroys as to interfere
with the proper or accurate metering of electricity; or

 (d) uses electricity through a tampered meter; or

 (e) uses electricity for the purpose other than for which the usage of
electricity was authorised,

so as to abstract or consume or use electricity shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may be extend to three years or with fine or
with both:

Provided that in a case where the load abstracted, consumed, or used or
attempted abstraction or attempted consumption or attempted use--

 (i) does not exceed 10 kilowatt, the fine imposed on first conviction shall
 not be less than three times the financial gain on account of such
 theft of electricity and in the event of second or subsequent
 conviction the fine imposed shall not be less than six times the
 financial gain on account of such theft of electricity;

 (ii) exceeds 10 kilowatt, the fine imposed on first conviction shall not be
 less than three times the financial gain on account of such theft of
 electricity and in the event of second or subsequent conviction, the
 sentence shall be imprisonment for a term not less than six months,
 but which may extend to five years and with fine not less than six
 times the financial gain on account of such theft of electricity:

Provided further that in the event of second and subsequent conviction of a
person where the load abstracted, consumed, or used or attempted
abstraction or attempted consumption or attempted use exceeds 10 kilowatt,
such person shall also be debarred from getting any supply of electricity for a
period which shall not be less than three months but may extend to two years
and shall also be debarred, from getting supply of electricity for that period
from any other source or generating station:

 Provided also that if it is proved that any artificial means or means not
authorised by the Board or licensee or supplier, as the case may be, exist for
the abstraction, consumption or use of electricity by the consumer, it shall be
presumed, until the contrary is proved, that any abstraction, consumption or
use of electricity has been dishonestly caused by such consumer.

 (1-A) Without prejudice to the provisions of this Act, the licensee or
supplier, as the case may be, may, upon detection of such theft or electricity,
immediately disconnect the supply of electricity:

 Provided that only such officer of the licensee or supplier, as authorised
for the purpose by the Appropriate Commission or any other officer of the

licensee or supplier, as the case may, of the rank higher than the rank so
authorised shall disconnect the supply line of electricity:

 Provided further that such officer of the licensee or supplier, as the case
may be, shall lodge a complaint in writing relating to the commission of such
offence in police station having jurisdiction within twenty-four hours from the
time of such disconnection:

 Provided also that the licensee or supplier, as the case may be, on
deposit or payment of the assessed amount or electricity charges in
accordance with the provisions of this Act, shall, without prejudice to the
obligation to the lodge the complaint as referred to in the second proviso to this
clause, restore the supply line of electricity within forty-eight hours of such
deposit or payment.

 (2) Any officer of the licensee or supplier as the case may be, authorised
in this behalf by the State Government may--

 (a) enter, inspect, break open and search any place or premises in
 which he has reason to believe that electricity has been or is being
 used unauthorisedly;

 (b) search, seize and remove all such devices, instruments, wires and
 any facilitator or article which has been or is being used for
 unauthorised use of electricity;

 (c) examine or seize any books of account or documents which in his
 opinion shall be useful for or relevant to, any proceedings in respect
 of the offence under sub-section (1) and allow the person from
 whose custody such books of account or documents are seized to
 make copies thereof or take extracts therefrom in his presence.

 (3) The occupant of the place of search or any person of his behalf shall
remain present during the search and a list of all things sized in the course of
such search shall be prepared and delivered to such occupant or person who
shall sign the list:

 Provided that no inspection, search and seizure of any domestic places
or domestic premises shall be carried out between sunset and sunrise except
in the presence of an adult male member occupying such premises.

 (4) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure , 1973, relating to
search and seizure shall apply, as far as may be, to searches and seizure
under this Act.

154. Procedure and power of Special Court.--(1) Notwithstanding
anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure , 1973 (2 of 1974), every
offence punishable under sections 135 to 140 and section 150 shall be triable

only by the Special Court within whose jurisdiction such offence has been
committed.

 (2) Where it appears to any court in the course of any inquiry or trial
that an offence punishable under sections 135 to 140 and section 150 in
respect of any offence that the case is one which is triable by a Special Court
constituted under this Act for the area in which such case has arisen, it shall
transfer such case to such Special Court, and thereupon such case shall be
tried and disposed of by such Special Court in accordance with the provisions
of this Act:

 Provided that it shall be lawful for such Special Court to act on the
evidence, if any, recorded by any court in the case of presence of the accused
before the transfer of the case to any Special Court:

 Provided further that if such Special Court is of opinion that further
examination, cross-examination and re-examination of any of the witnesses
whose evidence has already been recorded, is required in the interest of
justice, it may re-summon any such witness and after such further
examination, cross-examination or re-examination, if any, as it may permit, the
witness shall be discharged.

 (3) The Special Court may, notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) of section 260 or section 262 of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973 (2 of 1974), try the offence referred to in sections 135 to 140 and section
150 in a summary way in accordance with the procedure prescribed in the
said Code and the provisions of sections 263 to 265 of the said Code shall, so
far as may be, apply to such trial:

 Provided that where in the course of a summary trial under this sub-section, it appears to the Special Court that the nature of the case is such that
it is undesirable to try such case in summary way, the Special Court shall
recall any witness who may have been examined and proceed to re-hear the
case in the manner provided by the provisions of the said Code for the trial of
such offence:

 Provided further that in the case of any conviction in a summary trial
under this section, it shall be lawful for a Special Court to pass a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years.

 (4) A Special Court may, with a view to obtaining the evidence of any
person supposed to have been directly or indirectly concerned in or privy to,
any offence tender pardon to such person on condition of his making a full and
true disclosure of the circumstances within his knowledge relating to the
offence and to every other person concerned whether as principal or abettor in
the commission thereof, and any pardon so tendered shall, for the purposes of

 section 308 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), be deemed to
 have been tendered under section 307 thereof.

 (5) The Special Court shall determine the civil liability against a
 consumer or a person in terms of money for theft of energy which shall not be
 less than an amount equivalent to two times of the tariff rate applicable for a
 period of twelve months preceding the date of detection of theft of energy or
 the exact period of theft if determined whichever is less and the amount of civil
 liability so determined shall be recovered as if it were a decree of civil court.

 (6) In case the civil liability so determined finally by the Special Court is
 less than the amount deposited by the consumer or the person, the excess
 amount so deposited by the consumer or the person, to the Board or licensee
 or the concerned person, as the case may be, shall be refunded by the Board
 or licensee or the concerned person, as the case may be, within a fortnight
 from the date of communication of the order of the Special Court together with
 interest at the prevailing Reserve Bank of India prime lending rate for the
 period from the date of such deposit till the date of payment.

 Explanation.-- For the purposes of this section, civil liability means
 loss or damage incurred by the Board or licensee or the concerned person, as
 the case may be, due to the commission of an offence referred to in sections
 135 to 140 and section 150 . 

57. It is evident from Section 126(1) of the 2003 Act that the provisional

 assessment is made on the basis of inspection made by the assessing

 officer, who must be a part of the inspecting team, and it is the

 conclusion of the assessing officer which is provisionally accepted in

 respect of unauthorised use of electricity. The provisional assessment

 is to be to the best of his judgment .

58. Hence, the best judgment rule is applicable and elaborate reasoning is

 not required to be given in the provisional assessment order.

59. That apart, the argument of the petitioner that the principles of

 natural justice are violated cannot be applicable to the provisional

 assessment stage, since the accused person is served a copy of the

 assessment order and has an opportunity under Section 126(3) to file

 objectionand to have a reasonable opportunity of hearing, only after

 which a final order of assessment is passed.

60. It must be kept in mind that sub-sections (5) and (6) of Section 126 

 clearly stipulate the exact basis of calculation in the event the period

 of unauthorised use cannot be ascertained. Hence, some amount of

 credence has to be given to the judgment of the assessing officer, upon

 giving opportunity of hearing to the affected person.

61. However, the exercises is not judicial in nature and, as such, the

 detailed reasons required in, and the rigours of, an order passed by a

 court of law or judicial tribunal cannot be applied to assessments

 under Section 126 of the 2003 Act. It cannot be said merely on such

 premise that the provision is ultravires the Constitution.

62. Insofar as the argument of it being open to the assessing authority, at

 his sweet will, to clamp Section 126 or Section 135 , which have

 different penal consequences, is also not acceptable, since the two

 provisions operate in separate fields.

63. The law has been crystallized on the subject, which is evident from the

 judgments cited by the parties.

64. In Sri Seetaram Rice Mill s case, the Supreme Court categorically held

 that the provisions of Section 126 , read with Section 127 of the 2003

 Act, are a code in themselves. Right from the initiation of the

 proceedings by conducting an inspection, to the right to file an appeal

 before the appellate authority, all matters are squarely covered under

 the said provisions, which specifically provide the method of

 computation of the amount that a consumer would be liable to pay for

 excessive consumption of the electricity and for the manner of

 conducting the assessment proceedings. Thus, Section 126 has a

 purpose to achieve, that is, to put an implied restriction on such

 unauthorised consumption of electricity. The Supreme Court held

 that this defined legislative purpose cannot be permitted to be

 frustrated by interpreting a provision in a manner not intended in law.

 The principle of purposive interpretation would have to be applied in

 preference to textual interpretation of the provisions of Section 126 .

65. The Supreme Court went on to observe that the objects and reasons

 for enacting an Act are relevant considerations for the court while

 applying various principles of interpretation of statutes. In this

 context, it is argued that the discussion of the Standing Committee of

 Energy, 2001 was also considered while enacting the 2003 Act, which

 concluded that there is a need to provide safeguards to check the

 misuse of powers by unscrupulous elements. The Supreme Court

 further held that the provisions of Section 126 of the 2003 Act are

 self-explanatory, intended to cover situations other than the situations

 specifically covered under Section 135 .

66. In Orion Metal (P) Ltd. (supra), it was held by the Supreme Court that

 the term unauthorised use of energy is of wide connotation. There

 may be cases of unauthorised use, not amounting to theft, namely,

 exceeding the sanctioned load or using the electricity in the premises

 where it is not authorised. But at the same time, when there is an

 allegation of unauthorised use of energy by tampering the meter, such

 cases of unauthorised use of energy include theft as defined under

 Section 135 of the Act. The power conferred on authorities for making

 assessments under Section 126(1) and the power of the Special Court

 to determine the civil liability under Section 154(5) of the 2003 Act in

 cases of theft cannot be said to be parallel to each other.

67. The Supreme Court also held in Orion Metal (P) Ltd. (supra) that in

 cases of loss of energy on account of unauthorised use of energy not

 amounting to theft, it is always open for the authorities to assess the

 loss of energy by resorting to the power under Section 126(1) of the

 Act. In cases where the allegation is of unauthorised use of energy

 amounting to theft, apart from assessing in proceedings under Section

 126(1) of the Act, a complaint also can be lodged alleging theft of

 energy as defined under Section 135(1) of the Act. In such cases, the

 Special Court is empowered to determine civil liability under Section

 154(5) of the Act and on such determination, the excess amount, if

 any deposited by the petitioner, is to be refunded to the consumer.

68. The Division Bench of the Gujarat High Court in Ranchhod Bhai Vs.

 Union of India dealt with a challenge thrown to the vires of Sections

 126 and 135 of the 2003 Act. The scheme of the act was considered

 and the principle laid down in Orion Metal (P) Ltd. (supra) was

 reiterated. The court considered the issue as to whether legislatures

 have abdicated their power in favour of execution by delegating such

 legislative power to private persons and whether a private person has

 been delegated with the power of administering criminal justice

 system, for which the relevant provisions of law and the notifications,

 resolutions and provisions made thereunder were considered. The

 Division Bench of the Gujarat High Court held that it cannot be stated

 that the authorities have been provided with unbridled power, as

 inspection is made under Section 126 in presence of the user of

 unauthorised electricity and in presence of other witnesses. Before

 the final assessment, a provisional assessment order is to be made,

 opportunity of objection and hearing is to be given to the person and

 then only the final order is passed, the legality and propriety of which

 can be challenged in an appeal under Section 127 . Foolproof

 procedure having been laid down under the Act and the Rules framed

 thereunder, the delegation of such power cannot be held to be

 arbitrary, the court found.

69. It was also observed that the officer of the licensee or supplier,

 whoever may be authorised, has not been empowered to take

 administration of criminal justice in his hands, for which Special

 Courts have been constituted under Section 153 of the 2003 Act, for

 trial of such offence under Section 135 . The procedure to be adopted

 by the Special Court has also been prescribed under Section 154 ,

 which has also been empowered with the power of the court of

 sessions under Section 155 . Against this decision, it was held, appeal

 and revision is maintainable before the High Court under Section 156 .

70. Thus, the vires of the said Sections were upheld.

71. Another Division Bench of the same (Gujarat) High Court in Satish

 Babubhai Patel (supra) reiterated the proposition laid down in

 Ranchhod Bhai s case. From a reading of the Explanation below

 Section 126 , it was held that assessing officer means an officer of the

 State Government or the Board or licensee, as the case may be,

 designated by the State Government. Assessment of electricity

 charges in case a person indulges in unauthorised use of electricity is

 not a duty of the legislature and it cannot be said in normal course

 that there is an abdication of power or assessment in conferring the

 power to the delegate. The question decided was whether the power of

 assessment has been delegated by the legislature in favour of the

 licensee including an officer of the licensee. However, it was held to be

 evident from the Explanation below Section 126 that the assessing

 officer has been defined to be an officer of the State Government or

 Board or licensee, who is to be designated by the State Government.

 The Division Bench went on to observe that it is a settled law that the

 legislature, as a part of its legislative function, can confer powers to

 make rules and regulations for carrying the enactment into operation

 and effect. Thus, the vires of Sections 126 and 135 was upheld

 following Ranchhod Bhai s case.

72. It is trite law, as reiterated in Kusum Ingots and Alloys Limited (supra),

 that an order passed by any High Court in India on a writ petition

 questioning the constitutionality of a parliamentary act, whether

 interim or final, keeping in view Article 226(2) , will have effect

 throughout the territory of India subject, of course, to the applicability

 of the Act.

73. Hence, in the present case, since two Division Benches of the Gujarat

 High Court have categorically upheld the constitutionality of Sections

 126 and 135 of the 2003 Act, judicial propriety demands that the ratio

 of the said judgment sought not to be deviated from, following the

 principle of Kusum Ingots and Alloys Limited (supra).

74. Again, in Vipan Kumar Jain s case, while considering similar

 provisions of the Income Tax Act, 1961 , the Supreme Court observed

 that even though it could be said in a sense that the assessing officer

 was acting on behalf of the Revenue, nevertheless, there is no

 presumption of bias in such a situation. It was held there is nothing

 inherently unconstitutional in permitting the assessing officer to

 gather the information and to assess the value of the information

 himself. The Supreme Court held therein that the assessing officer s

 decision on the basis of material to which he had been witness in the

 course of the raid is not the final word in the matter, since the

 assessment order is appealable under the provisions of the statute

 itself and ultimately by way of judicial review. The question of bias

 has to be decided on the facts of each case.

75. Such proposition is apt for the present case as well and applies

 squarely to the case at hand. The same ratio, as laid down by the

 Supreme Court, is fully applicable with regard to Section 126 

 assessments as well, vis-à-vis the 2003 Act.

76. As held by a Five-Judge Bench of the Supreme Court in Hamdard

 Dawakhana s case, to ascertain the constitutionality of an enactment

 on the ground of violation of the Articles in Part III of the Constitution

 requires an assessments of its true nature and character, including its

 subject-matter, the area in which it is intended to operate, its purport

 and intent. Another principle which was reiterated in the said

 judgment is that while examining the constitutionality of a statute it

 must be assumed that the legislature understands and appreciates

 the need of the people and the laws it enacts are directed to solve

 problems which are made manifest by experience and the elected

 representatives assembled in a legislature enact laws which they

 consider to be reasonable for the purpose for which they are enacted.

 Presumption, therefore, is in favour of the constitutionality of an

 enactment.

77. Another perspective, as rightly argued by the CESC Limited, cannot be

 brushed away in the present case. The petitioners in all the present

 writ petitions have long exceeded the limitation period for preferring

 challenge to the final orders of assessment under Section 127 of the

 2003 Act and have directly taken recourse to the present writ

 petitions. In PDF Limited (supra), the Supreme Court aptly held that

 challenge to the validity of a statute, particularly by unscrupulous

 litigants raising such challenge only to avoid compliance, is to be

 taken note of.

78. The law, as crystallised in the above decisions, hold the field and

 cannot be deviated from.

79. Thus, the challenge of the petitioners to the vires of Section 126 and

 135 of the 2003 Act fails on several grounds. Although there is some

 overlapping between the two Sectionswith regard to cases of

 tampering, there is no question of applying double standards for the

 same offence. In cases where ingredients of theft as well as

 unauthorised use of electricity are both satisfied, the authorities can

 take steps by making assessment orders under Section 126 and

 proceeding with the criminal trial under Section 135 before the Special

 Court. The argument that the complainant is the prosecutor as well

 as the judge does not hold good, since the Special Court designated

 for such purpose has been empowered with the powers of a Sessions

 Judge and a full-fledged criminal trial is conducted before arriving at

 the conclusion that a person is guilty of theft of electricity. Thus, the

 allegation of theft, having criminal consequences, is not decided at all

 by any officer of the licensee.

80. Insofar as the provisional assessment under Section 126(1) is

 concerned, there is no scope of hearing the accused person at that

 juncture, since the provisional assessment orders are not conclusive.

 In fact, a right of hearing is given to the consumer and an opportunity

 is also given for the consumer to file its written objection, prior to

 assessing the final order. If right of hearing is to be given to the

 consumer even before the provisional assessment is made, it would

 unnecessarily prolong an otherwise summary procedure and the

 expeditious time-line envisaged in the statute shall be defeated.

81. Section 126(5) of the 2003 Act clearly delineates the procedure and

 method of computation with regard to such assessment, which cannot

 be said to be ex facie absurd or disproportionate.

82. Moreover, the assessing officer shall be an appointee of the State

 Government, be it an officer of the Government or the licensee.

 Hence, there is an independent air about the assessing officer, who

 does not function merely in the capacity of an employee of the

 licensee.

83. In fact, the same logic is applicable to several other statutes. Glaring

 examples are the powers given to an Estate Officer under the Public

 Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1971 and powers

 conferredon the banks and financial institutions under the

 Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and

 Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002 .

84. In view of the above discussions, it cannot be said that the assessing

 officer has unbridled power to exercise according to his whims and

 fancies in arriving at the final order of assessment. Hence, it is

 illogical to argue that the final order is merely a farce, requiring the

 Section itself to be struck down.

85. On the other hand, Section 127 of the 2003 Act provides an

 independent appellate authority for challenge against the final

 assessment order. Hence, such orders are not inscrutable by superior

 forums.

86. Insofar as the fifty per cent mandatory deposit envisaged under

 Section 127(2) for preferring an appeal is concerned, the same cannot

 be said to be exorbitant. In fact, such stipulation is squarely

 inconsonance with the purpose and objects of the 2003 Act, as

 discussed in Sri Seetaram Rice Mill s case.

87. It would be entirely arbitrary for the court to sit in judgment, in a

 proceeding under Article 226 of the Constitution, over the propriety of

 the quantum required as pre-deposit for appeal under Section 127 .

 Certain decisions are best left to the legislature to decide in its own

 prudence, to maintain a balance of separation of powers, which is the

 bulwark of the Indian Constitution. The presumption ought to be that

 since the Legislature, in its wisdom, has fixed a particular amount as

 pre-requisite for preferring an appeal (which is not prima facie

 astronomically high), the same is backed by reasonable technical

 research and takes forward the purpose and objects of the statute,

 one of which is to deter rampant misuse and pilferage of energy, which

 is a limited commodity.

88. As regards the argument that orders under Section 126 are required

 to be backed up by reasons, it is well-settled that summary orders in

 the nature of an order of assessment under Section 126 need not be

 backed by elaborate reasoning on the same footing as the orders of a

 judicial forum or a court of law. The bills sent by the licensee are the

 outcome of orders of provisional and final assessment and, as such, it

 cannot be said that those are beyond the scope of the contemplation

 of the 2003 Act. Particularly, it has to be kept in mind that the

 Supreme Court categorically held in Sri Seetaram Rice Mill s case that

 Sections 126 and 127 are a complete code in themselves.

89. That apart, findings under Section 126per se do not indict a person of

 theft, which charge has criminal consequences. The assessing officer

 merely calculates the loss suffered by the licensee for the

 unauthorized use of electricity. The question, whether the charge of

 theft has been established, is left for the decision of the Special Court,

 which holds a full-fledged criminal trial. Thus, there is no scope of

 violation of Articles 19 or 21 of the Constitution of India in any

 manner whatsoever.

90. It is also provided in Section 114 of the Evidence Act that official and

 judicial acts have a presumption of correctness. Hence, there is no

 reason for the assessing officer appointed by the State, irrespective of

 whether he or she is a functionary of the licensee, to be presumed to

 conduct investigation in an unfair manner. The reasons given in the

 final order of assessment cannot be labelled as rubber stamp reasons 

 or pretence of reasons as argued by the petitioners on such ground

 alone. Rather, there is some justification in functionaries of licensees,

 who are themselves technical personnel holding acumen on the

 subject, to be entrusted with the task of assessing such loss.

91. The Supreme Court has held time and again that Sections 126 and

 135 operate on different footings and both proceedings can run

 parallelly in cases where there is overlapping between the allegations

 of theft and unauthorized use of electricity. However, per se such

 inter-play between the Sections cannot render the same ultravires the

 Constitution of India.

92. Insofar as the judgments cited by the petitioner are concerned, the

 same do not have any material bearing on the case for the reasons

 discussed below.

93. The judgment rendered by the Supreme Court in Kerala State

 Electricity Board (supra) deals with the question whether the

 consumption of electricity by the respondents (consumers) therein in 

 excess of the connected load/contracted load would amount to

 unauthorized use of electricity under explanation (b) to Section 126(6) 

 of the 2003 Act.
 
 94. The Supreme Court elaborately discussed the relevant provisions and

 considered the alleged inconsistency between the rules and

 regulations and the statute. Such decision, as such, cannot have any

 material bearing on the present consideration. The petitioner had

 sought to advance general propositions with regard to violation of

 Article 14 of the Constitution of India, which are not applicable to the

 present case at all. In case of Kerala State Electricity Board (supra),

 the KERC Regulation 153(15) of the 2014 Code, was declared invalid,

 being inconsistent with Section 126 . Such proposition does not

 render the Section itself unconstitutional, rather, it reiterates the

 validity of the Section, on the anvil of which the State Regulation was

 declared to be invalid.
 
 95. Reliance placed by the petitioner on Sri Seetaram Rice Mill s case is

 misplaced, since the same clearly upholds the constitutionality of the

 sections-in-question.
 
 96. The petitioner has cited several judgments, thereby resorting to

 unnecessary repetition on the proposition that the writ petition under

 Article 226 of the Constitution is maintainable in several cases, if the

 criteria stipulated therein are fulfilled.
 
 97. However, there is nothing on record to indicate that the petitioners 

 time-barred challenge to their respective final orders of assessment by

 way of the writ petitions, thereby obliquely bypassing the statutory

 remedy of Section 127 of the 2003 Act,has exposed any gross lacunae

 on the part of the authority fit for interference under Article 226. 

 98. In Suraj Mall Mohta and Co. (supra) it was held, on the anvil of Article

 14 of the Constitution, that the same rule of evidence and mode of

 procedure should be applied and available to everyone.

 99. Such ratio is not attracted to the present case, since no distinction is

 made between persons between whom Sections 126 and 135 are

 respectively applicable. The two provisions do not provide mutually

 exclusive remedies, unlike the Income Tax Act provision discussed in

 Suraj Mall (supra) and Minakhshi s case.
 
 100. There is no comparable yardstick between the said judgments and the

 case at hand, since Sections 126 and 135 operate in different fields,

 although there are overlapping features insofar as tampering of meter

 is concerned.
 
 101. P.N. Kaushal s case, cited by the petitioner, speaks about

 unreasonable restrictions on the right to carry on business being

 violative of Article 19 of the Constitution. In the present case,

 however, there is nothing unreasonable nor any restriction on

 business, nor is there any unbridled power conferred on the licensee

 to invoke either Section 126 or Section 135 according to their whims

 and fancies. The Sections operate in specific modes as stipulated in

 the statute and there are several safeguards and checks in

 functionality of the Sections. Inasmuch as K.S. Rashid s case is

 concerned, the same follows the ratio of Suraj Mall Mohta and Co.

 (supra) and need not be discussed separately in an elaborate manner.

 102. Inasmuch as the Division Bench decision of the Madhya Pradesh High

 Court is concerned, which was cited by the petitioner, the civil liability

 contemplated in Section 154 is to be determined by a Special Court

 and is dependent upon criminal liability being fixed under Section 135 

 of the 2003 Act. Hence, it cannot be said that the assessment made

 under Section 126 for unauthorised use operates within the same

 scope as determination of civil liability for theft under Section 154 .

 The assessment under Section 154 is made not by an officer of the

 licensee but by a designated Special Court. In fact, the deposit made

 initially by the consumer is subjected to the final assessment made by

 the Special Court and the excess amount, if any, is to be refunded to

 the consumer under Section 154 (6) of the 2003 Act.
 
 103. As regards the proposition that access to justice is a part of the right

 to life, the said ratio, as reiterated in Anita Kushwaha (supra), is well-settled and is undisputed. However, the petitioners have failed to

 demonstrate any manner in which access to justice has been curtailed

 by operation of Sections 126 and 135 of the 2003 Act.
 
 104. The judgments cited on the doctrine of per incuriam is entirely

 irrelevant in the present context, since Sri Seetaram Rice Mill s case,

 relied on by the petitioners to distinguish Orion Metal (P) Ltd.

 (supra),bolsters the constitutionality of Sections 126 and 135 .

 105. Particular instances of illegality committed by particular assessing

 officers in certain cases cannot render the statute itself

 unconstitutional. It is not the sections-in-question which encourage

 such unconstitutionality but stray acts of particular officers in certain

 cases. Hence, the vires of Sections 126 and 135 cannot be said to be

 vitiated by such individual instances of illegality, if any. The Division

 Bench judgment of this Court in Jadavpur Tea Co. Ltd.(supra)

 proceeded on the line that a final order was passed with closed mind.

 However, the provisional and final orders of assessment under Section

 126 need not necessarily be so, since a right of hearing is given to the

 consumer, including a right to file objection, which is to be considered

 while passing the final order of assessment.
 
 106. In any event, Section 127 provides a right of appeal against the same.

 The fifty per cent deposit pre-requisite is not ex facie contrary to law.

 Even appellate courts, under Order XLI Rule 5 (3) (c) of the Code of

 Civil Procedure , are empowered to direct deposit of security amount as

 pre-condition for stay. In fact, Order XVI Rule 1 (3) of the Code

 provides that where the appeal is against a decree for payment of

 money, the appellant shall deposit the amount disputed in the appeal

 or furnish security therefor. Again, Order XVI Rule 5 (1) stipulates

 that an appeal shall not operate as a stay of proceedings under a

 decree or order appealed from, unless stay order is actually passed.

 Hence, for all practical purposes, an appeal even under the Civil

 Procedure Code against a money decree is rendered infructuous

 unless the full decretal amount is secured.There is no conceivable

 reason why only fifty per cent shall not be deposited while filing an

 appeal under Section 127 of the 2003 Act. Individual instances of

 erroneous assessment cannot be cited to invalidate the provision

 itself.

 107. It is reiterated that the level of reasoning by the assessing officer while

 passing a final order of assessment cannot be equated with that a

 court of law and/or a judicial forum, in view of the inherent nature of

 such exercise, the guidelines for exercise of which are stipulated in

 Section 126(5) and (6) and by the Regulations formulated by the

 concerned Regulatory Commissions.
 
 108. Such exercise cannot be said to be ex facie orders without authority,

 which would render them a nullity. The judgments including Vinay

 Tiyagi (supra) cited by the petitioner with regard to fair and proper

 investigation pertain to criminal proceedings. It is a fundamental

 principle of criminal jurisprudence, which has been fully honoured in

 Sections 153 and 154 of the 2003 Act, by designation of Special

 Courts for adjudication of allegations of criminal offences including

 theft, as stipulated under Sections 135 to 140 of the 2003 Act,

 following the full rigour of a criminal trial,and consequential

 determination of civil liability.
 
 109. Hence, on a comprehensive assessment of the arguments made by the

 parties in the light of the cited judgments, it is evident that Sections

 126 and 135 , as held by the Division Benches of the Gujarat High

 Court, pass the test of constitutionality with flying colours.

 110. Insofar as the individual cases of the writ petitioners are concerned,

 the present writ petitioners have long overshot the limitation period

 for preferring challenges under Section 127 of the 2003 Act. Moreover,

 there is nothing indicated in the impugned assessments which reek of

 palpable arbitrariness or patent perversity. As such, no

 interferenceunder Article 226 is deserved in any of the cases even on

 merits. Hence,WPA No.6237 of 2022, WPA No.10861 of 2022, WPA No.

 6112 of 2022, WPA No.7584 of 2022 and WPA No.7652 of 2022are

 dismissed on contest without any order as to costs.
 
 111. Urgent certified server copies, if applied for, be issued to the parties

 upon compliance of due formalities.
 
 

 ( Sabyasachi Bhattacharyya, J. )
