Castron Technologies Ltd vs The Damodar Valley Corporation Through ... on 16 December, 2022 

 Author: Ravi Ranjan 

 Bench: Chief Justice , Sujit Narayan Prasad 

 IN THE HIGH COURT OF JHARKHAND AT RANCHI
 W.P.(C) No.3704 of 2012
 ----
Castron Technologies Ltd., having its works at Bokaro
Industrial Area, Balidih, P.O. Balidih, P.S. Balidih, Dist.
Bokaro, through one of its Directors Ashok Kumar
Choudhary, Son of Late Nil Chand Choudhary, Resident of
Chiragora, Dhanbad, P.O. P.S. Dhanbad, Dist. Dhanbad
 ... ... Petitioner
 Versus
1. The Damodar Valley Corporation through its Chairman,
 DVC Building, VIP Road, P.O., P.S. District Kolkata
 (W.B.).
2. The Chairman, Damodar Valley Corporation, DVC
 Building, VIP Road, P.O., P.S. District Kolkata (W.B.).
3. The Chief Engineer (Commercial), Damodar Valley
 Corporation, DVC Building, VIP Road, P.O., P.S. 
 District Kolkata (W.B.).
4. The Superintending Engineer (Commercial), Damodar
 Valley Corporation, DVC Building, VIP Road, P.O., P.S. 
 District Kolkata (W.B.).
5. Assistant Engineer (Electrical), Damodar Valley
 Corporation, BIADA sub-station, GOMD-IVB, Putki, P.O.
 P.S. - Putki, District-Dhanbad.
 ... ... Respondents
 -------
CORAM : HON BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE
 HON BLE MR. JUSTICE SUJIT NARAYAN PRASAD
 ------
For the Petitioner : Mr. Navniti Kumar Singh, Sr. Advocate
 Mr. Dhananjay Kumar Pathak, Advocate
For the Resp. DVC : Mr. R.N.Sahay, Senior Advocate.
 Mr. Prashant Kr. Singh, Advocate
 Mr. Soumitra Boroi, Advocate
 --------
C.A.V. on 14.09.2022 Pronounced on 16.12.2022

Per Sujit Narayan Prasad, J.
 
 The instant writ petition is under Article 226 of the

Constitution of India seeking for direction upon the

respondents to restore the power supply of the petitioner

which has been disconnected on 25.06.2012.

 Further prayer has been made for quashing of the report

dated 25.06.2012 as also for showing cause that on what

basis and without any authentic report by a competent

testing agency regarding the flaw in the CT device, the

respondents can be permitted to realized the amount as

mentioned in the FIR.
 
 Further prayer has been made for quashing of the

assessment order passed under Section 135 of the Electricity

Act, 2003, (hereinafter to be referred to as the Act, 2003)

communicated vide letter dated 02.07.2012 whereby without

following the procedure prescribed by law as stipulated under

 Section 126 of the Act 2003 and 15.8 of the supply Code

Regulation, the respondents have assessed the amount of Rs.

4,14,49,512/- and has ordered to pay the same.

 2. Brief facts of the case, as per the pleadings made in the

writ petition, which are required to be enumerated herein,

read as under :-
 
 The writ petitioner has got an electricity connection in

HT Category with the respondent Damodar Valley

Corporation (hereinafter to be referred to as DVC) vide

Consumer No. 34173 for a contract demand of 3000 KVA.
 
 On 17.12.2011, the respondents have inspected the

devices and Meter in the premises of the petitioner and the

respondents with the consent and agreement of the

petitioner, installed a new Meter in the same series with old

existing Meter of the petitioner. While commissioning of the

said new meter, the C.T. ratio and P.T. ratio was also verified

by the respondents so as to equalize the ratio of the old as

well as new meter and a joint report was also prepared on

17.12.2011, copy of which had been supplied to the

representative of the petitioner.
 
 It is the case of the writ petitioner that the monthly

inspection for the purpose of taking the meter reading has

been made till May 2012 and reports have been prepared

which was duly signed by the authority of the respondents as

well as by the representative of the petitioners. No deficiency

and discrepancies was alleged against the petitioner till the

month of May, 2012. But, on 20.06.2012 there had been a

breakdown in the supply of electricity to the petitioner

through the DVC supply line and many lightning arrestors

and other devices were burnt, consequent upon the same, the

devices were changed by the petitioner.
 
 On 25.06.2012 some authorities of respondents visited

the premises of the petitioner to inspect the metering unit,

meter and other devices by opening the seal of the meter

room on the basis of secret information regarding mischief

having been done. The representative of the writ petitioner

fully co-operated with the authority in the inspection.

However, authorities in course of inspection, had prepared

rough reports as they have not found anything adverse and

such report was not even counter signed by the petitioner/

representative.

 The DVC authorities had taken shutdown of the power

for the purpose of inspection but did not restore the power

supply of the petitioner without disclosing any reason. The

representative of the writ petitioner visited the office of

respondents but they did not get any response and on next

day, i.e., on 26.06.2012, the petitioner came to know from

the official of respondent no.5 that an FIR has been lodged

against the petitioner company by the respondent no.5 for

pilfering electricity being Balidih P.S. Case no.93 of 2012

dated 26.06.2012 under Section 379 IPC and Section 135 

Electricity Act.
 
 The respondent authorities, thereafter, served

assessment of demand to the tune of Rs.4.14 Crore which

according to the writ petitioner, is absolutely incorrect and

improper decision.
 
 The writ petitioner, in the aforesaid background, has

approached this Court by filing the instant writ petition.

 3. Mr. Navniti Kumar Singh, learned senior counsel

appearing for the petitioner has submitted that it is not

evident from the FIR or from any other document whether the

respondent no.5 has been authorized by the competent

authority under Section 135 of the Act 2003. Similarly it is

not evident as to whether the respondent no.5 or any other

authority had authorization as assessing authority under

 Section 126 / 135 of Electricity Act, 2003. Thus, the entire

exercise and actions of the respondents has been sought to

be declared as null and void.
 
 The further ground has been taken by the writ petitioner

that as per the Electricity Act, 2003 the assessment of loss of

energy charges has to be made by an assessing authority

after affording due opportunity of hearing to the petitioner,

that too after service upon it a provisional assessment order

but respondents have neither prepared any provisional

assessment order nor it has been served upon the petitioner

nor even any assessment proceeding has taken place.

 The writ petitioner, in the aforesaid background, has

submitted that the provisional assessment which has been

made in pursuance to the provision as contained under

 Section 126 of the Act, 2003, is absolutely false and is not in

pursuance to the provision contained therein read with

Clause 15.8 of the Electricity Supply Code.

 Learned counsel for the petitioner, in order to buttress

his argument, has placed reliance on the judgment rendered

by Hon ble Apex Court in West Bengal state Electricity

Distribution Company Limited Others Vs Orion Metal

Private Limited and Another [(2020) 18 SCC 588]. 

 4. Mr. R.N.Sahay, learned senior counsel for the

respondents, on the other hand, has submitted that the

inspection which was made by the DVC team had visited the

premises of the petitioner on 25.06.2012 at 11.30 hrs and

after taking the shutdown available at around 13.40 hrs

inspected the metering cubicle Tarrif Meters etc. and during

inspection by the help of CT analyzers the testing team tested

both the R phase and B-phase CTS and found that CT

secondary current has been diverted through this CT shot

circuit arrangement, as such it is very clear case of electricity

pilferage.
 
 The contention has been raised that the spot report was

prepared but even after asking the representative of the

petitioner no signature was put on it and accordingly the FIR

was lodged on 26.06.2012.
 
 The contention which has been raised on behalf of the

petitioner that a rough report was prepared is absolutely

incorrect, rather the said report was final and that was

prepared on the basis of the inspection conducted by the

concerned inspecting team.
 
 According to the respondents, the actual energy was

registered as 1701382 KWH for 25 days in the month of June

2012, i.e., up to 25th June 2012 and corresponding gross bill

was Rs.68,27,306/- and loss of energy due to pilferage was

5278546 KWH and, therefore, the subsequent provisional bill

was issued for Rs. 4,14,49,512/- as assessed by the

Government authorized assessing officer, as such the

demand is correctly raised.

 Further contention has been raised that the provisional

assessment order under the covering letter bearing no.

GOMD-IV/commercial 629 dated 02.07.2012 under the

signature of Superintending Engineer towards theft of

electricity by the petitioner was sent through registered post

in compliance of the provision of the Regulation, therefore the

letter dated 02.7.2012 addressed to the petitioner/consumer

may be treated as provisional assessment of the consumption

and matter may be referred to the accessing authority and

petitioner may be provided an opportunity to file an objection

under section 126(3) of the Act, 2003, for the purpose of

providing opportunity of hearing and thereafter proceed to

take action as provided under section 126(4)(5) and (6).

 In order to buttress his argument, reliance has been

placed on the Judgment rendered by the Hon ble Apex Court

in Executive Engineer Southern Electricity Supply

Company Orissa Ltd. (SOUTHCO) Anr. Vs. Sri Seetaram

Rice Mill [(2012) 2 SCC 108].
 
 The further plea of the respondent DVC is that the

judgment upon which reliance has been placed on behalf of

the writ petitioner upon the judgment rendered by Hon ble

Apex Court in West Bengal state Electricity Distribution

Company Limited Ors. Vs Orion Metal Private Limited

and Another (Supra), but even in the said judgment also at

paragraph 12 to 16 it has been held that the parallel

proceeding is permissible under Section 126 and 135 of the

Act, 2003. Therefore, the assessment of unauthorized use of

electricity by the petitioner/consumer, being a parallel

proceeding, is maintainable under section 126 of the Act,

2003 along with a proceeding under Section 135 of the Act,

2003. 
 
 5. Reply to the counter affidavit has been filed by the

petitioner wherein the plea has been taken by rebutting the

stand inter alia taken by the respondents in the counter

affidavit that the petitioner company has subsequently been

acquitted from the criminal case and the trial court while

coming to the conclusion of acquitting the petitioner company

from the criminal liability, has found that the evidence placed

by the prosecuting agency is not sufficient to prove the

charge. There is specific finding also by the trial court

discarding the evidence which has been produced before the

trial court by the prosecuting agency, i.e., the wire etc.

Therefore, contention has been raised on behalf of the

petitioner that the writ petitioner has been honourably

exonerated from the criminal charges, which also suggests

that the action of the respondent DVC is nothing but only to

harass and in that view of the matter also, after acquittal of

the petitioner company from the criminal charges, there is no

justification in keeping the demand pending against the writ

petitioner as is being said by the respondents in their counter

affidavit saying the same to be treated as provisional

assessment under the provision of Section 126 of the Act,

2003.
 
 Learned counsel appearing for the petitioner has

submitted that the moment the FIR has resulted into

honourable acquittal of the petitioner company on the basis

of lack of evidence, the entire liability as is being now raised

in the garb of assessment being made under Section 126 of

the Act, 2003, requires interference by this Court.

 Learned counsel for the petitioner further submits that

the writ petitioner has already deposited 50% of the tentative

assessment amount of loss, i.e., Rs.75 lacs for restoration of

proper supply in pursuance to the interim order dated

26.07.2012. The said deposit was subject to result of the writ

petition. Since the writ petitioner has been acquitted

honourably in the criminal case, as such, nothing remains

therein to take the plea of unauthorized use of electricity in

the light of the provision of Section 126(3) of the Act, 2003.

The demand which is being made by way of provisional

assessment under Section 126(3) of the Act, 2003 requires

interference also for the reason that the process as stipulated

under Section 126 of the Act, 2003 has not been followed

since the petitioner company has not been provided

opportunity to file objection, as required to be filed in view of

the provision of Section 126(3) of the Act, 2003.
 
 

 Since the respondent DVC has flouted the statutory

provision even while casting liability upon the writ petitioner

regarding the assessment being made under Section 126 of

the Act, 2003, in that view of the matter also, the assessment

so made under Section 126 of the Act, 2003 requires

interference and is fit to be quashed and set aside and in

consequence thereof, the amount which has been deposited

to the tune of Rs.75 lacs in the light of interim order dated

26.07.2012 and further Rs. 25 lacs at the time of getting

anticipatory bail by virtue of the order passed in A.B.A.

No.3213 of 2012, is required to be refunded back in favour of

the writ petitioner.
 
 6. We have heard the learned counsel for the parties,

perused the documents available on record as also the

finding recorded by the learned Single Judge in the impugned

order.
 
 7. This Court has gathered from the material available on

record and the argument advanced on behalf of the

petitioner, the following grounds in questioning the

assessment so made under Section 126 of the Act, 2003:-

 (i) The provision stipulated under Section 126 of the Act,

2003 has not been followed since the writ petitioner has not

been provided an opportunity to file objection as required to

be filed under Section 126(3) of the Act, 2003.
 
 

 (ii) The inspection so made under Section 126 (1) of the Act,

2003 cannot be construed to be an inspection made in strict

sense as per the provision stipulated under Section 126 of

the Act, 2003 since there is no signature of the representative

of the petitioner company in the so called provisional

assessment.
 
 (iii) The writ petitioner has been acquitted in the criminal

case and once there is honourable acquittal in the criminal

case, even on that pretext the writ petitioner cannot be held

liable to make payment of assessment so made under Section

126 of the Act, 2003.
 
 8. While on the other hand, the respondents have taken

the ground that the main contention of the writ petitioner

that there is violation of the statutory provision of not

providing opportunity to file objection to the writ petitioner,

the same cannot be considered to be a sustainable ground for

interfering with the demand, rather the best course available

will be to provide an opportunity to the writ petitioner to file

objection.
 
 Such ground has been taken mainly for the reason that

the very object and intent of the Electricity Act, 2003 is to

secure public money and avoid theft/unauthorized use of

electricity.
 
 The writ petitioner, therefore, is raising the technical

issue and, if that be so, the opportunity can be provided to
 
 

the writ petitioner instead of quashing the demand raised by

the respondents against the writ petitioner.

 There is no bearing of proceeding initiated under Section

135 of the Act, 2003 on the proceeding initiated under

 Section 126 of the Act, 2003 since both run parallely on

different context. Even if the writ petitioner has been

acquitted in the criminal case, then also the writ petitioner

cannot be allowed to escape from its liability with respect to

the unauthorized use of electricity as is being covered under

the provision of Section 126 of the Act, 2003.

 9. This Court, on the basis of the aforesaid grounds, as has

been agitated on behalf of the petitioner, is first required to

answer the following issues :-
 
 (i) Whether the institution of FIR under Section 135 of the

Act, 2003 has any bearing upon the assessment so made

under Section 126 of the Act, 2003?
 
 (ii) Since the writ petitioner has been acquitted from the

criminal case, can he be allowed to escape from its liability

with respect to unauthorized use of electricity in view of the

provision of Section 126 of the Act, 2003?
 
 (iii) Whether merely because there is procedural lacunae as

provided under Section 126 of the Act, 2003, the entire

demand on technical ground can be quashed and set aside

without taking into consideration the very object and intent of

the Electricity Act, 2003 which per se is for avoiding the
 

 electricity theft and misutilization of electricity and thereby

misutilization of public money?
 
 10. This Court, before entering into the aforesaid issues, is

required to refer herein that the electricity supply in India

was governed by three enactments, namely, Indian Electricity

Act, 1910 , the Electricity (Supply) Act, 1948 and the

 Electricity Regulatory Commission Act, 1998 .

 The Indian Electricity Act, 1910 , created the basic

framework for the electric supply industry in India which was

then in its fancy.
 
 The Act envisaged growth of the electricity through

private licensee. It created the legal framework for laying

down of wires and other works relating to the supply of

electricity. The Electricity Supply Act, 1948 mandated the

creation of State Electricity Board having the responsibility of

arranging the supply of electricity in the State. But, over a

period of time, however, the performance of the State

Electricity Boards has deteriorated substantially on account

of various factors. For instance, the power to fix tariff vests

with the State Electricity Boards, they have generally been

unable to take decision on tariffs in a professional and

independent manner and tariff determination practice has

been done by the State Governments.
 
 To address this issue and to provide for distancing of

Government from determination of tariffs, the Electricity
 
 

Regulatory Commission Act was enacted in 1998. It created

the Central Electricity Regulatory Commission and has

enabling provision through which the State Governments can

create State Electricity Regulatory Commission. But different

States have undertaken reforms through their own Reform

Acts by separating Boards into separate generation,

transmission and distribution companies. With the policy of

encouraging private sector s participation in generation,

transmission and distribution and the objective of distancing

the regulatory responsibility from the Government to the

Regulatory Commission, the need for harmonizing and

rationalizing the provisions in the Indian Electricity Act,

1910 , the Electricity (Supply) Act, 1948 and the Electricity

Regulatory Commission Act, 1998 in a new self-contained

comprehensive legislation arose. Accordingly, it became

necessary to enact a new legislation for regulating the

electricity supply in the country which would replace the

existing laws, preserve its core features other than those

relating to the mandatory existence of State Electricity

Boards and the responsibility of the State Government and

the State Electricity Boards with respect to regulating

licenses. There is also need to provide for newer concepts like

power trading and open access.
 
 Apart from that, the other object was to restrict the

misutilization and loss of revenue to the Electricity Boards.
 
 

 11. After a period of time the performance of Electricity

Boards has deteriorated substantially on account of various

factors, one of the factors was the theft of the electricity and

in order to meet out the situation, the provision of Section

126 has been incorporated in the new Act which provides a

provision to deal with a situation of use of electricity

unauthorisedly apart from the penalties to be imposed on

account of theft of electricity as per the provision made under

 Section 135 . Section 126 reads as under:
 
 ―126.Assessment-(1) If on an inspection of any place
 or premises or after inspection of the equipments,
 gadgets, machines, devices found connected or uses,
 or after inspection of records maintained by any
 person, the assessing officer comes to the conclusion
 that such person is indulging in unauthorized use of
 electricity, he shall provisionally assess to the best of
 his judgment the electricity charges payable by such
 person or by any other person benefited by such use.
 (2) The order of provisional assessment shall be served
 upon the person in occupation or possession or in
 charge of the place or premises in such manner as
 may be prescribed.
 (3) The person, on whom an order has been served
 under sub-section (2), shall be entitled to file
 objections, if any, against the provisional assessment
 before the assessing officer, who shall, after affording a
 reasonable opportunity of hearing to such person, pass
 a final order of assessment within thirty days from the
 date of service of such order of provisional assessment,
 of the electricity charges payable by such person.
 (4) Any person served with the order of provisional
 assessment may, accept such assessment and deposit
 the assessed amount with the licensee within seven
 

 days of service of such provisional assessment order
 upon him.
 (5) If the assessing officer reaches to the conclusion
 that unauthorized use of electricity has taken place,
 the assessment shall be made for the entire period
 during which such unauthorized use of electricity has
 taken place and if, however, the period during which
 such unauthorized use of electricity has taken place
 cannot be ascertained, such period shall be limited to
 a period of twelve months immediately preceding the
 date of inspection.
 (6) The assessment under this section shall be made at
 a rate equal to [twice] the tariff applicable for the
 relevant category of services specified in sub-section
 (5).‖
 Explanation.--For the purposes of this section,--
 (a) ‗assessing officer means an officer of a State
 Government or Board or licensee, as the case may be,
 designated as such by the State Government;
 (b) ‗unauthorised use of electricity means the usage of
 electricity--
 (i) by any artificial means; or
 (ii) by a means not authorised by the person or
 authority or licensee concerned; or
 (iii) through a tampered meter; or
 (iv) for the purpose other than for which the usage of
 electricity was authorised; or
 (v) for the premises or areas other than those for which
 the supply of electricity was authorised.‖

 The definition of ―unauthorized use of electricity‖ with

explanation ‗(b) of Section-126 of the Act, 2003 is as follows:-

 ―(b) ―unauthorized use of electricity‖ means the usage of

electricity-
 
 (i) by any artificial means; or
 (ii) by a means not authorized by the concerned person
 or authority or licensee; or
 

 (iii) through a tampered meter; or
 (iv) for the purpose other than for which the usage of
 electricity was authorized; or
 (v) for the premises or areas other than those for which
 the supply of electricity was authorized.‖

 Part XIV of the Act, 2003 provides theft of electricity

which is relevant in the present case as follows:-
 
 135.Theft of Electricity-(1) whoever, dishonestly,-
 (a) taps, makes or causes to be made any connection
 with overhead, underground or under water lines or
 cables, or service wires, or service facilities of a
 licensee or supplier as the case may be; or
 (b) tampers a meter, installs or uses a tampered meter,
 current reversing transformer, loop connection or any
 other device or method which interferes with accurate
 or proper registration, calibration or metering of
 electric current or otherwise results in a manner
 whereby electricity is stolen or wasted; or
 (c) damages or destroys an electric meter, apparatus,
 equipment, or wire or causes or allows any of them to
 be so damaged or destroyed as to interfere with the
 proper or accurate metering of electricity; or
 (d) uses electricity through a tampered meter; or
 (e) uses electricity for the purpose other than for which
 the usage of electricity was authorized, so as to
 abstract or consume or use electricity shall be
 punishable with imprisonment for a term which may
 extend to three years or with find or with both:
 Provided that in a case where the load abstracted,
 consumed, or used or attempted abstraction or
 attempted consumption or attempted use:
 (i) does not exceed 10 kilowatt, the fine imposed on
 first conviction shall not be less than three times the
 financial gain on account of such theft of electricity
 and in the event of second or subsequent conviction
 the fine imposed shall not be less than six times the
 financial gain on account of such theft of electricity;
 
 

 (ii) exceeds 10 kilowatt, the fine imposed on first
conviction shall not be less than three times the
financial gain on account of such theft of electricity
and in the event of second or subsequent conviction,
the sentence shall be imprisonment for a term not less
than six months, but which may extend to five years
and with fine not less than six times the financial gain
on account of such theft of electricity:
 Provided further that in the event of second and
subsequent conviction of a person where the load
abstracted, consumed, or used or attempted
abstraction or attempted consumption or attempted
use exceeds 10 kilowatt, such person shall also be
debarred from getting any supply of electricity for a
period which shall not be less than three months but
may extend to two years and shall also be debarred
from getting supply of electricity for that period from
any other source or generating station:
 Provided also that if it is proved that any artificial
means or means not authorized by the Board or
licensee or supplier, as the case may be, exist for the
abstraction, consumption or use of electricity by the
consumer, it shall be presumed, until the contrary is
proved, that any abstraction, consumption or use of
electricity has been dishonestly caused by such
consumer.
 (1A) Without prejudice to the provisions of this Act, the
licensee or supplier, as the case may be, may, upon
detection of such theft of electricity, immediately
disconnect the supply of electricity:
 Provided that only such officer of the licensee or
supplier, as authorized for the purpose by the
Appropriate Commission or any other officer of the
licensee or supplier, as the case may be, of the rank
higher than the rank so authorized shall disconnect
the supply line of electricity:
 
 Provided further that such officer of the licensee or
supplier, as the case may be, shall lodge a complaint
in writing relating to the commission of such offence in
 

 police station having jurisdiction within twenty-four
hours from the time of such disconnection:
 
 Provided also that the licensee or supplier, as the case
may be, on deposit or payment of the assessed amount
or electricity charges in accordance with the provisions
of this Act, shall, without prejudice to the obligation to
lodge the complaint as referred to in the second
proviso to this clause, restore the supply line of
electricity within forty-eight hours of such deposit or
payment.
 (2) Any officer of the licensee or supplier as the case
may be, authorized in this behalf by the State
Government may-
 (a) enter, inspect, break open and search any place or
premises in which he has reason to believe that
electricity has been or is being, used unauthorisedly;
 (b) search, seize and remove all such devices,
instruments, wires and any other facilitator or article
which has been, or is being used for unauthorized use
of electricity;
 (c) examine or seize any books of account or
documents which in his opinion shall be useful for or
relevant to, any proceedings in respect of the offence
under sub-section (1) and allow the person from whose
custody such books of account or documents are
seized to make copies thereof or take extracts
therefrom in his presence.
 (3) The occupant of the place of search or any person
on his behalf shall remain present during the search
and a list of all things seized in the course of such
search shall be prepared and delivered to such
occupant or person who shall sign the list:
 Provided that no inspection, search and seizure of any
domestic places or domestic premises shall be carried
out between sunset and sunrise except in the presence
of an adult male member occupying such premises.
(4) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure ,
1973, relating to search and seizure shall apply, as far
as may be, to searches and seizure under this Act.‖
 

 12. The issue about applicability of Section 126 and 135 of

the Electricity Act, 2003 arose in case of Executive Engineer

Southern Electricity Supply Company Orissa Ltd.

(SOUTHCO) Anr. v. Sri Seetaram Rice Mill (Supra).

 In the aforesaid case the Hon ble Apex Court had the

occasion to consider the distinction between the

unauthorized use of electricity as provided in Section 126 of

the Act, 2003 and theft of electricity as provided under

 Section 135 of the Act, 2003. While dealing with the issue it

has been laid down at para 24 to 30 which reads as under:-

 24. Upon their plain reading, the marked differences
 in the contents of Sections 126 and 135 of the 2003
 Act are obvious. They are distinct and different
 provisions which operate in different fields and have no
 common premise in law. We have already noticed that
 Sections 126 and 127 of the 2003 Act read together
 constitute a complete code in themselves covering all
 relevant considerations for passing of an order of
 assessment in cases which do not fall under Section
 135 of the 2003 Act.
 25. Section 135 of the 2003 Act falls under Part XIV
 relating to ―offences and penalties‖ and title of the
 section is ―theft of electricity‖. The section opens with
 the words ―whoever, dishonestly‖ does any or all of the
 acts specified under clauses (a) to (e) of sub-section (1)
 of Section 135 of the 2003 Act so as to abstract or
 consume or use electricity shall be punishable for
 imprisonment for a term which may extend to three
 years or with fine or with both. Besides imposition of
 punishment as specified under these provisions or the
 proviso thereto, sub-section (1-A) of Section 135 of the
 2003 Act provides that without prejudice to the
 provisions of the 2003 Act, the licensee or supplier, as
 the case may be, through officer of rank authorised in
 

 this behalf by the appropriate commission, may
immediately disconnect the supply of electricity and
even take other measures enumerated under sub-sections (2) to (4) of the said section. The fine which
may be imposed under Section 135 of the 2003 Act is
directly proportional to the number of convictions and
is also dependent on the extent of load abstracted.
 26. In contradistinction to these provisions, Section
126 of the 2003 Act would be applicable to the cases
where there is no theft of electricity but the electricity
is being consumed in violation of the terms and
conditions of supply leading to malpractices which
may squarely fall within the expression ―unauthorised
use of electricity‖. This assessment/proceedings would
commence with the inspection of the premises by an
assessing officer and recording of a finding that such
consumer is indulging in an ―unauthorised use of
electricity‖. Then the assessing officer shall
provisionally assess, to the best of his judgment, the
electricity charges payable by such consumer, as well
as pass a provisional assessment order in terms of
 Section 126(2) of the 2003 Act.
 27. The officer is also under obligation to serve a
notice in terms of Section 126(3) of the 2003 Act upon
any such consumer requiring him to file his objections,
if any, against the provisional assessment before a
final order of assessment is passed within thirty days
from the date of service of such order of provisional
assessment. Thereafter, any person served with the
order of provisional assessment may accept such
assessment and deposit the amount with the licensee
within seven days of service of such provisional
assessment order upon him or prefer an appeal
against the resultant final order under Section 127 of
the 2003 Act. The order of assessment under Section
126 and the period for which such order would be
passed has to be in terms of sub-sections (5) and (6) of
 Section 126 of the 2003 Act. The Explanation to
 Section 126 is of some significance, which we shall
 

 deal with shortly hereinafter. Section 126 of the 2003
Act falls under Part XII and relates to investigation and
enforcement and empowers the assessing officer to
pass an order of assessment.
 28. Section 135 of the 2003 Act deals with an offence
of theft of electricity and the penalty that can be
imposed for such theft. This squarely falls within the
dimensions of criminal jurisprudence and mens rea is
one of the relevant factors for finding a case of theft.
On the contrary, Section 126 of the 2003 Act does not
speak of any criminal intendment and is primarily an
action and remedy available under the civil law. It does
not have features or elements which are traceable to
the criminal concept of mens rea.
 29. Thus, it would be clear that the expression
―unauthorised use of electricity‖ under Section 126 of
the 2003 Act deals with cases of unauthorised use,
even in the absence of intention. These cases would
certainly be different from cases where there is
dishonest abstraction of electricity by any of the
methods enlisted under Section 135 of the 2003 Act. A
clear example would be, where a consumer has used
excessive load as against the installed load simpliciter
and there is violation of the terms and conditions of
supply, then, the case would fall under Section 126 of
the 2003 Act. On the other hand, where a consumer,
by any of the means and methods as specified under
 Sections 135(a) to 135(e) of the 2003 Act, has
abstracted energy with dishonest intention and
without authorisation, like providing for a direct
connection bypassing the installed meter, the case
would fall under Section 135 of the Act.
 30. Therefore, there is a clear distinction between the
cases that would fall under Section 126 of the 2003
Act on the one hand and Section 135 of the 2003 Act
on the other. There is no commonality between them in
law. They operate in different and distinct fields. The
assessing officer has been vested with the powers to
pass provisional and final order of assessment in cases
 

 of unauthorised use of electricity and cases of
 consumption of electricity beyond contracted load will
 squarely fall under such power. The legislative
 intention is to cover the cases of malpractices and
 unauthorised use of electricity and then theft which is
 governed by the provisions of Section 135 of the 2003
 Act.‖
 It is further evident from the judgment rendered in the

case of Sri Seetaram Rice Mill (supra) wherein while

considering the acts enumerated under Section 135 of the

aforesaid Act, 2003 with reference to the word ―dishonesty‖

occurring at the commencement of Section 135 of the Act

2003 and if the dictionary meaning of the word ―dishonest‖

would be taken, at paragraph 35 the Hon ble Supreme Court

has held as follows:-
 
 35. All these explanations clearly show that
 dishonesty is a state of mind where a person does an
 act with an intent to deceive the other, acts
 fraudulently and with a deceptive mind, to cause
 wrongful loss to the other. The act has to be of the type
 stated under sub-sections (1)(a) to (1)(e) of Section 135 
 of the 2003 Act. If these acts are committed and that
 state of mind, mens rea, exists, the person shall be
 liable to punishment and payment of penalty as
 contemplated under the provisions of the 2003 Act. In
 contradistinction to this, the intention is not the
 foundation for invoking powers of the competent
 authority and passing of an order of assessment under
 Section 126 of the 2003 Act.‖
 So far as ambit and scope of Section 126 with reference

to word ―unauthorized use‖ means at paragraph 37 to 40 the

Hon ble Supreme Court has held as follows:-
 

 37. Wherever the assessing officer arrives at the
conclusion that unauthorised use of electricity has
taken place, the assessment shall be made for the
entire period during which such unauthorised use of
electricity has taken place and if such period cannot be
ascertained, it shall be limited to a period of 12
months immediately preceding the date of inspection
and the assessment shall be made at the rate equal to
twice the tariff applicable for the relevant category of
service specified under these provisions. This
computation has to be taken in terms of Sections
126(5) , 126(6) and 127 of the 2003 Act. The complete
procedure is provided under these sections. Right from
the initiation of the proceedings till preferring of an
appeal against the final order of assessment and
termination thereof, as such, it is a complete code in
itself.
 38. We have already indicated that the provisions of
 Section 126 do not attract the principles of criminal
jurisprudence including mens rea. These provisions
primarily relate to unauthorised use of electricity and
the charges which would be payable in terms thereof.
To determine the controversy in the present case, it
will be essential to examine the implication of the
expression ―unauthorised use of electricity‖ as
contained in Explanation (b) of Section 126 of the 2003
Act.
 39. In order to explain these expressions, it will be
necessary for us to refer to certain other provisions
and the Regulations as well. These expressions have to
be understood and given meaning with reference to
their background and are incapable of being fairly
understood, if examined in isolation. It is always
appropriate to examine the words of a statute in their
correct perspective and with reference to relevant
statutory provisions. The expression ―unauthorised
use of electricity‖ on its plain reading means use of
electricity in a manner not authorised by the licensee
of the Board. ―Authorisation‖ refers to the permission
 

 of the licensee to use of electricity, subject to the terms
and conditions for such use and the law governing the
subject.
 40. To put it more aptly, the supply of electricity to a
consumer is always subject to the provisions of the
2003 Act, State Acts, Regulations framed thereunder
and the terms and conditions of supply in the form of a
contract or otherwise. Generally, when electricity is
consumed in violation of any or all of these, it would be
understood as ―unauthorised use of electricity‖. But
this general view will have to be examined in the light
of the fact that the legislature has opted to explain this
term for the purposes of Section 126 of the 2003 Act.
The said provision, along with the Explanation, reads
as under:
 ―126. Assessment.--(1) If on an inspection of any
place or premises or after inspection of the
equipments, gadgets, machines, devices found
connected or used, or after inspection of records
maintained by any person, the assessing officer comes
to the conclusion that such person is indulging in
unauthorised use of electricity, he shall provisionally
assess to the best of his judgment the electricity
charges payable by such person or by any other
person benefited by such use.
 (2) The order of provisional assessment shall be served
upon the person in occupation or possession or in
charge of the place or premises in such manner as
may be prescribed.
 (3) The person, on whom an order has been served
under sub-section (2), shall be entitled to file
objections, if any, against the provisional assessment
before the assessing officer, who shall, after affording a
reasonable opportunity of hearing to such person, pass
a final order of assessment within thirty days from the
date of service of such order of provisional assessment,
of the electricity charges payable by such person.
(4) Any person served with the order of provisional
assessment may, accept such assessment and deposit
 

 the assessed amount with the licensee within seven
 days of service of such provisional assessment order
 upon him.
 (5) If the assessing officer reaches to the conclusion
 that unauthorised use of electricity has taken place,
 the assessment shall be made for the entire period
 during which such unauthorised use of electricity has
 taken place and if, however, the period during which
 such unauthorised use of electricity has taken place
 cannot be ascertained, such period shall be limited to
 a period of twelve months immediately preceding the
 date of inspection.
 (6) The assessment under this section shall be made at
 a rate equal to twice the tariff applicable for the
 relevant category of services specified in sub-section
 (5).
 Explanation.--For the purposes of this section,--
 (a) ‗assessing officer means an officer of a State
 Government or Board or licensee, as the case may be,
 designated as such by the State Government;
 (b) ‗unauthorised use of electricity means the usage of
 electricity--
 (i) by any artificial means; or
 (ii) by a means not authorised by the person or
 authority or licensee concerned; or
 (iii) through a tampered meter; or
 (iv) for the purpose other than for which the usage of
 electricity was authorised; or
 (v) for the premises or areas other than those for which
 the supply of electricity was authorised.‖

 It is thus evident that the supply of electricity to a

consumer is always subject to the provisions of the 2003 Act,

State Acts regulations from thereunder and the terms and

conditions of supply in the form of a contract or otherwise,

when electricity consumed in violation of any or of these it

would be understood as unauthorized use of electricity.
 
 

 The Hon ble Apex Court in the aforesaid judgment has

dealt with the meaning of unauthorized use of electricity

which reads as under:
 
 41. The ―unauthorised use of electricity‖ means the
 usage of electricity by the means and for the reasons
 stated in sub-clauses (i) to (v) of clause (b) of the
 Explanation to Section 126 of the 2003 Act. Some of
 the illustratively stated circumstances of
 ―unauthorised use‖ in the section cannot be construed
 as exhaustive. The ―unauthorised use of electricity‖
 would mean what is stated under that Explanation, as
 well as such other unauthorised user, which is
 squarely in violation of the abovementioned statutory
 or contractual provisions.
 42. Black s Law Dictionary (8th Edn.) defines
 ―unauthorised‖ as ―done without the authority, made
 without actual, implied or apparent authority‖.
 ―Unauthorised‖ is a concept well recognised under
 different statutes, for example, under Section 31-A of
 the Delhi Development Act, 1957 (the DDA Act ) the
 authority has the power to seal the ―unauthorised‖
 development, if the misuser of the premises would
 come within the ambit of unauthorised development.
 But if such misuse does not come within the ambit of
 ―unauthorised development‖, such power is not
 available to the authority. Simpliciter misuse,
 therefore, may not fall within the ambit of
 unauthorised development under the provisions of the
 DDA Act .
 43. In M.C. Mehta v. Union of India this Court held
 that if the misuse was in violation of the permission,
 approval or sanction or in contravention of any
 conditions, subject to which the said
 permission/approval has been granted in terms of
 Section 30 of the DDA Act, then it will be
 ―unauthorised use‖. We have primarily referred to this
 case to support the reasoning that ―unauthorised
 development‖ is one which is contrary to a master plan 
 

 or zonal development plan as was the case under the
 DDA Act . Just as the right to develop a property is
controlled by the restrictions of law as well as the
terms and conditions of the permission granted for
that purpose, the use of electricity is similarly
controlled by the statutory provisions and the terms
and conditions on which such permission is granted to
use the electricity.
 44. The unauthorised use of electricity in the manner
as is undisputed on record clearly brings the
respondent ―under liability and in blame‖ within the
ambit and scope of Section 126 of the 2003 Act. The
blame is in relation to excess load while the liability is
to pay on a different tariff for the period prescribed in
law and in terms of an order of assessment passed by
the assessing officer by the powers vested in him
under the provisions of Section 126 of the 2003 Act.
 45. The expression ―means‖ used in the definition
clause of Section 126 of the 2003 Act can have
different connotations depending on the context in
which such expression is used. In terms of Black s Law
Dictionary (8th Edn.) p. 1001, ―mean‖ is--―of or
relating to an intermediate point between two points or
extremes‖ and ―meaning‖ would be ―the sense of
anything, but esp. of words; that which is conveyed‖.
The word ordinarily includes a mistaken but
reasonable understanding of a communication.
―Means‖ by itself is a restrictive term and when used
with the word ―includes‖, it is construed as exhaustive.
In those circumstances, a definition using the term
―means‖ is a statement of literal connotation of a term
and the courts have interpreted ―means and includes‖
as an expression defining the section exhaustively. It is
to be kept in mind that while determining whether a
provision is exhaustive or merely illustrative, this will
have to depend upon the language of the section,
scheme of the Act, the object of the legislature and its
intent.
 

 46. ―Purposive construction‖ is certainly a cardinal
principle of interpretation. Equally true is that no rule
of interpretation should either be overstated or
overextended. Without being overextended or
overstated, this rule of interpretation can be applied to
the present case. It points to the conclusion that an
interpretation which would attain the object and
purpose of the Act has to be given precedence over any
other interpretation which may not further the cause
of the statute. The development of law is particularly
liberated both from literal and blinkered interpretation,
though to a limited extent.
 47. The precepts of interpretation of contractual
documents have also undergone a wide-ranged
variation in the recent times. The result has been
subject to one important exception to assimilate the
way in which such documents are interpreted by
Judges on the common sense principle by which any
serious utterance would be interpreted by ordinary life.
In other words, the common sense view relating to the
implication and impact of provisions is the relevant
consideration for interpreting a term of document so as
to achieve temporal proximity of the end result.
 48. Another similar rule is the rule of practical
interpretation. This test can be effectually applied to
the provisions of a statute of the present kind. It must
be understood that an interpretation which upon
application of the provisions at the ground reality,
would frustrate the very law should not be accepted
against the common sense view which will further
such application.
 49. Once the court decides that it has to take a
purposive construction as opposed to textual
construction, then the legislative purpose sought to be
achieved by such an interpretation has to be kept in
mind. We have already indicated that keeping in view
the legislative scheme and the provisions of the 2003
Act, it will be appropriate to adopt the approach of
purposive construction on the facts of this case. We
 

 have also indicated above that the provisions of
 Section 126 of the 2003 Act are intended to cover the
 cases over and above the cases which would be
 specifically covered under the provisions of Section
 135 of the 2003 Act.
 51. The primary object of the expression ―means‖ is
 intended to explain the term ―unauthorised use of
 electricity‖ which, even from the plain reading of the
 provisions of the 2003 Act or on a common sense view
 cannot be restricted to the examples given in the
 Explanation. The legislature has intentionally omitted
 to use the word ―includes‖ and has only used the word
 ―means‖ with an intention to explain inter alia what an
 unauthorised use of electricity would be. It must be
 noticed that clause (iv) of Explanation (b) and sub-section (5) of Section 126 of the 2003 Act were both
 amended/substituted by the same amending Act 26 of
 2007, with a purpose and object of preventing
 unauthorised use of electricity not amounting to theft
 of electricity within the meaning of Section 135 of the
 2003 Act. This amendment, therefore, has to be given
 its due meaning which will fit into the scheme of the
 2003 Act and would achieve its object and purpose.
 52. The expression ―means‖ would not always be open
 to such a strict construction that the terms mentioned
 in a definition clause under such expression would
 have to be inevitably treated as being exhaustive.
 There can be a large number of cases and examples
 where even the expression ―means‖ can be construed
 liberally and treated to be inclusive but not completely
 exhaustive of the scope of the definition, of course,
 depending upon the facts of a given case and the
 provisions governing that law.‖

 The meaning of word ―means‖ as has been considered by

the Hon ble Apex Court in the case of K. V. Muthu v.
 
 Angamuthu Ammal [(1997) 2 SCC 53] wherein at paragraph
 

 10 the Hon ble Apex Court has explained the word ―means‖

as follows:-
 
 ―10. Apparently, it appears that the definition is
 conclusive as the word ―means‖ has been used to
 specify the members, namely, spouse, son, daughter,
 grandchild or dependant parent, who would constitute
 the family. Section 2 of the Act in which various terms
 have been defined, opens with the words ―in this Act,
 unless the context otherwise requires‖ which indicates
 that the definitions, as for example that of ―family‖,
 which are indicated to be conclusive may not be
 treated to be conclusive if it was otherwise required by
 the context. This implies that a definition, like any
 other word in a statute, has to be read in the light of
 the context and scheme of the Act as also the object for
 which the Act was made by the legislature.‖

 The word dishonestly as defined under Section 135 also

needs to be dealt with, the word dishonestly defined under

 section 24 of the Indian Penal Code states that whoever does

anything with the intention of causing wrongful gain to one

person or wrongful loss to another person is said to do that

thing dishonestly.
 
 In the case of Dr. S. Dutt vs. State of U.P [AIR 1966

SC 523] the Hon ble Apex Court has defined the word

dishonestly, as a person who does intent with the intention of

causing wrongful gain to one person or wrongful loss to

another person. 
 
 In another judgment in the case of Ramratan and Ors.
 
 vs. The State of Bihar Anr. [AIR 1965 SC 926], the

Hon ble Apex Court has observed that a person is said to do a
 

 thing dishonestly when he does intent with the intention of

causing wrongful gain to one person or wrongful loss to

another person.
 
 13. As per the provision of Sub section 2 to 5 of Section 126 

of the Act the order of provisional assessment shall be served

upon the persons in occupation or possession or in charge of

the place of premises in such manner as may be prescribed

while the procedure is also contemplated in the case of theft

following under any of the Acts, enumerated under Section

135(1) a 2(e).
 
 Part XIV of the Electricity Act, 2003 relates to offences

and penalties and Section 135 provides theft of electricity.

 Section 135(1) provides that whoever dishonestly, taps,

makes or causes to be made any connection with overhead,

underground or under water lines or cables or service wires

or service facilities of a licensee, or tampers a meter or

installs or use a tampered meter which enforce with accurate

and provide registered, calibration or metering of electricity

current or otherwise relates in a manner whereby electricity

is stolen or wasted, damages or destroys electric meter, so as

to abstract or consume or use electricity shall be punishable

with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three

years or with fine or with both.
 
 Section 135(2) provides that any officer, authorized in

this behalf by the State Government, may enter, inspect,
 
 

break upon and storage any place or premises in which he

has reason to play with electricity is used unauthorisedly,

and search and seized remove of such devices, instruments,

wires or article which has been or is being used for

unauthorized use of electricity. Under Section 135(4) the

provisions of the Code of criminal procedure, relating to

search and seizure, shall apply to searches and seizure under

the Act. Under Section 147 the penalties imposed under

 Electricity Act, 2003 shall be in addition to and not in

derogation to, any liability in respect of payment of

compensation.
 
 Part XV relates to special courts and Section 153 to the

constitution of special courts.
 
 Under Section 153(1) the State Government may, for the

purpose of providing speedy trial of offence, refer to in section

135 to 139 by notification in the official gazette, constitute as

many special courts as may be necessary for such area or

areas, as may be specified in the notification.

 Section 154 prescribes the procedure and power of

special courts and under sub section (1) every offence

punishable under Section 135 to 139, shall be triable only by

the special courts.
 
 Section 154(4) enables the special court to determine

the civil liability against a consumer, or a person, in terms of

money for theft of energy which shall not be less than an
 
 

amount equivalent to two times tarrif rate applicable for a

period of twelve months providing the date of detection of

theft of energy or the exact period of theft if determined,

whichever is less and the amount of civil liability so

determined shall be recovered as if it were decreed to the civil

court.
 
 In the explanation of Section 154 ―civil liability‖ is

defined to mean the loss or damage incurred by the Board or

the licensee or the concerned person, as the case may be, due

to commission of an offence referred under Section 135 to

 139.

 Here it also needs to refer the judgment rendered by

Constitution Bench of Hon ble Apex Court in the case of

 Tinsukhia Electric Supply Co. Ltd. vs. State of Assam

and Others , reported in (1989) 3 SCC 709 where at para

118 and 120 it has been laid down that the provision of a

statute must be so construed as to make it effective and

operative, which reads as under: 
 
 118. The courts strongly lean against any
 construction which tends to reduce a statute to futility.
 The provision of a statute must be so construed as to
 make it effective and operative, on the principle ―ut res
 magis valeat quam pereat‖. It is, no doubt, true that if
 a statute is absolutely vague and its language wholly
 intractable and absolutely meaningless, the statute
 could be declared void for vagueness. This is not in
 judicial review by testing the law for arbitrariness or
 unreasonableness under Article 14; but what a court
 of construction, dealing with the language of a statute,
 

 does in order to ascertain from, and accord to, the
 statute the meaning and purpose which the legislature
 intended for it.‖
 ―Unless the words were so absolutely senseless that I
 could do nothing at all with them, I should be bound
 to find some meaning and not to declare them void for
 uncertainty.‖
 ―120. It is, therefore, the court s duty to make what it
 can of the statute, knowing that the statutes are
 meant to be operative and not inept and the nothing
 short of impossibility should allow a court to declare a
 statute unworkable.‖
 It is, thus, evident from the proposition laid down by 

Hon ble Apex Court that provision as contained under Section

126 of the Act, 2003 is to run parallel to Section 135 . 
 
 While Section 126 of the Act, 2003 relates with the

unauthorized use of electricity which has the intent of

mens rea but, on the other hand, if there is theft of electricity

knowingly, then it will come under the fold of Section 135 of

the Act, 2003.
 
 The same view has recently been reiterated by Hon ble

Apex Court in the case of West Bengal state Electricity

Distribution Company Limited Vs Orion Metal Private

Limited and Another (Supra), wherein at paragraph 12 to

16 it has been held that the parallel proceeding is permissible

under Section 126 and 135 of the Act, 2003. Paragraphs 12

to 16 read as hereunder:- 
 
 ―12. A perusal of the aforesaid provisions and on
 giving a conjoint reading of the same, it appears to us
 that after an inspection of any place or any premises of
 any consumer, when the assessing officer comes to a
 

 conclusion that the consumer is indulging in
unauthorised use of electricity, the provisional
assessment to the best of his judgment is to be made
in accordance with Section 126(1) of the Act and such
provisional assessment shall be served upon the
person in occupation of the premises. After giving an
opportunity to file objections to the provisional
assessment, the assessing officer is empowered to pass
a final order of the assessment assessing the loss of
energy, on account of unauthorised use of energy. The
unauthorised use of electricity is defined under Section
126(6)(b) of the Act. It is clear from the aforesaid
definition that unauthorised use of electricity means,
the usage of electricity by any artificial means or by a
means not authorised by the person or authority or
licensee concerned; or through a tampered meter; or
for the purpose other than for which the usage of
electricity was authorised; or for the premises or areas
other than those for which the supply of electricity was
authorised.
 13. It is clear from the reading of Section 126(6)(b)(iii) 
of the Act that instances of use of energy through a
tampered meter is included in the definition of
unauthorised use of electricity. If that is so, there is no
reason, for excluding the power of the authorities for
making assessment under Section 126(1) of the Act to
assess the loss of energy, where electricity is used
through a tampered meter. All instances of
unauthorised use of energy may not amount to theft of
electricity within the meaning of Section 135 of the
Act, but at the same time, the theft of electricity which
is covered by Section 135 of the Act, will fall within the
definition of unauthorised use of electricity. As per
 Section 135 (1- A) of the Act , without prejudice to the
other provisions of the Act, the licensee or supplier, as
the case may be, upon detection of theft of electricity,
is empowered to disconnect the power supply
immediately. Further, as per the third proviso to
Section 135(1-A) of the Act, the licensee or supplier, as
 

 the case may be, on deposit or payment of assessed
amount or electricity charges, without prejudice to the
obligation to lodge a complaint, can restore the power
supply electricity within forty-eight (48) hours of
deposit/payment of such amount. Thus, it is clear that
the authorities under the Act are empowered to make a
provisional and final assessment by invoking power
under Section 126(1) of the Act, even in cases where
electricity is unauthorisedly used by way of theft.
When a consumer deposits the assessed amount, the
licensee or the supplier has to restore the power
supply. The assessed amount referred to in the
aforesaid proviso, relates to assessment which is
contemplated under Section 126(1) of the Act only.
There is apparent distinction between Section 126 and
 Section 135 of the Act. Section 126 forms part of the
scheme which authorises electricity supplier to
ascertain loss in terms of revenue caused to it by the
consumer by his act of ―unauthorised use of
electricity‖ whereas Section 135 deals with offence of
theft if he is found to have indulged himself in the acts
mentioned in clauses (a) to (e) of sub-section (1) of
 Section 135 of the Electricity Act. Further, it is also
clear from Section 154 of the Act, which prescribes
procedure and power of the Special Court, that the
Special Court is empowered to convict the consumer
and impose a sentence of imprisonment. The Special
Court, in cases, where a criminal complaint is lodged,
is also empowered to determine civil liability under
 Section 154(5) of the Act. As per Section 154(6) of the
Act, in case civil liability so determined by the Special
Court is less than the amount deposited by the
consumer or the person, the excess amount so
deposited by the consumer or the person, shall be
refunded by the licensee or the person concerned, as
the case may be. Merely because the Special Court is
empowered to determine civil liability under Section
154(5) of the Act, in cases where a complaint is lodged,
it cannot be said that there is no power conferred on
 
 

authorities to make provisional assessment/final
assessment under Section 126 of the Act.
 14. In Southern Electricity Supply Co. of Orissa
Ltd. v. Sri Seetaram Rice Mill [(2012) 2 SCC 108], this
Court has considered the scope of the Explanation to
 Section 126(b)(iv) of the 2003 Act. In the aforesaid
case, as there was no allegation of theft, this Court has
held consumption in excess of sanctioned/contracted
load, comes within the meaning of unauthorised use of
electricity as per Explanation (b)(iv) of Section 126 of
the Electricity Act, 2003. Drawing a distinction
between Section 126 to that of Section 135 of the Act,
paras 29 and 61 of the aforesaid judgment read as
under : (SCC pp. 125 134)
 ―29. Thus, it would be clear that the expression
 ―unauthorised use of electricity‖ under Section 126 
 of the 2003 Act deals with cases of unauthorised
 use, even in the absence of intention. These cases
 would certainly be different from cases where there
 is dishonest abstraction of electricity by any of the
 methods enlisted under Section 135 of the 2003
 Act. A clear example would be, where a consumer
 has used excessive load as against the installed
 load simpliciter and there is violation of the terms
 and conditions of supply, then, the case would fall
 under Section 126 of the 2003 Act. On the other
 hand, where a consumer, by any of the means and
 methods as specified under Sections 135(a) to
 135(e) of the 2003 Act, has abstracted energy with
 dishonest intention and without authorisation, like
 providing for a direct connection by passing the
 installed meter, the case would fall under Section
 135 of the Act.
 ***
 61. Unauthorised use of electricity cannot be
 restricted to the stated clauses under the
 Explanation but has to be given a wider meaning so
 as to cover cases of violation of the terms and
 conditions of supply and the Regulations and
 
 

 provisions of the 2003 Act governing such supply.
 ―Unauthorised use of electricity‖ itself is an
 expression which would, on its plain reading, take
 within its scope all the misuse of the electricity or
 even malpractices adopted while using electricity. It
 is difficult to restrict this expression and limit its
 application by the categories stated in the
 Explanation. It is indisputable that the electricity
 supply to a consumer is restricted and controlled by
 the terms and conditions of supply, the Regulations
 framed and the provisions of the 2003 Act.‖
 15. We also do not find any valid reason for making a
distinction as made by the High Court in applying
 Section 126 of the Act. From the scheme of the Act, it
appears that after inspection team notices
unauthorised use of energy by tampering the meter,
the authorities can disconnect the power supply
immediately and make immediate assessment for loss
of energy, by invoking power under Section 126(1) of
the Act. The term ―unauthorised use of energy‖ is of
wide connotation. There may be cases of unauthorised
use of energy, not amounting to theft, which are cases
viz. exceeding the sanctioned load or using the
electricity in the premises where its use is not
authorised, etc. But at the same time, when there is an
allegation of unauthorised use of energy by tampering
the meter, such cases of unauthorised use of energy
include ―theft‖ as defined under Section 135 of the Act.
The power conferred on authorities for making
assessment under Section 126(1) of the Act and power
to determine civil liability under Section 154(5) of the
Act, cannot be said to be parallel to each other. In this
regard, we are of the view that the High Court has
committed an error in recording a finding, that both
proceedings cannot operate parallelly. In a given case
where there is no theft of energy, amounting to
unauthorised use of energy, in such cases no
complaint of theft can be lodged as contemplated
under Section 135 of the Act. In such cases for loss of
 
 

 energy, on account of unauthorised use of energy not
 amounting to theft, it is always open for the authorities
 to assess the loss of energy by resorting to power
 under Section 126(1) of the Act. In cases where
 allegation is of unauthorised use of energy amounting
 to theft, in such cases, apart from assessing the
 proceedings under Section 126(1) of the Act, a
 complaint also can be lodged alleging theft of energy as
 defined under Section 135(1) of the Act. In such cases,
 the Special Court is empowered to determine civil
 liability under Section 154(5) of the Act. On such
 determination of civil liability by the Special Court, the
 excess amount, if any, deposited by the petitioner, is to
 be refunded to the consumer. It is a settled principle
 that to prove the guilt of the accused in a criminal
 proceeding, authorities have to prove the case beyond
 reasonable doubt and the element of mens rea is also
 to be established. On the other hand, such a strict
 proof is not necessary for assessing the liability under
 Section 126(1) of the Act.
 16. For the aforesaid reasons, this civil appeal is
 allowed and the judgment and order dated 18-12-2017
 passed by the High Court of Calcutta in Orion Metal (P)
 Ltd. v. W.B. State Electricity Distribution Co. Ltd. [2017
 SCC OnLine Cal 20455] and the corrected order dated
 7-2-2018 [2018 SCC OnLine Cal 15176], are set aside.
 No order as to costs.‖ 
 14. In the given facts of the case, the fact is admitted that

there was inspection of the petitioner premises where the

electricity was being supplied, however, the same inspection

has been disputed by the writ petitioner on the ground of

non-observance of the provision as contained under Section

126 read with Clause 15.8 of the Electricity Supply Code.

 Sub-section (1) of Section 126 of the Act, 2003, as has

been quoted and referred hereinabove, contains a provision
 
 

that if an inspection of any place or premises or after

inspection of the equipments, gadgets, machines, devices

found connected or used, or after inspection of records

maintained by any person, the assessing officer comes to the

conclusion that such person is indulging in unauthorized use

of electricity, he shall provisionally assess to the best of his

judgment the electricity charges payable by such person or

by any other person benefited by such use.

 Sub-section (2) thereof provides that the order of

provisional assessment shall be served upon the person in

occupation or possession or in charge of the place or

premises in such manner as may be prescribed.

 Sub-section (3) thereof provides that the person, on

whom an order has been served under sub-section (2), shall

be entitled to file objections, if any, against the provisional

assessment before the assessing officer, who shall, after

affording a reasonable opportunity of hearing to such person,

pass a final order of assessment within thirty days from the

date of service of such order of provisional assessment, of the

electricity charges payable by such person.

 Sub-section (4) thereof provides that any person served

with the order of provisional assessment may, accept such

assessment and deposit the assessed amount with the

licensee within seven days of service of such provisional

assessment order upon him.
 
 

 Sub-section (2) provides that if the assessing officer

reaches to the conclusion that unauthorized use of electricity

has taken place, the assessment shall be made for the entire

period during which such unauthorized use of electricity has

taken place and if, however, the period during which such

unauthorized use of electricity has taken place cannot be

ascertained, such period shall be limited to a period of twelve

months immediately preceding the date of inspection.

 While Sub-section (6) thereof provides that the

assessment under this section shall be made at a rate equal

to [twice] the tariff applicable for the relevant category of

services specified in sub-section (5).
 
 The Assessing Officer has been defined as under

 ‗Explanation as also the unauthorized use of electricity has

been defined.
 
 15. The Supply Code has been brought in force which

contains under Clause 15.8 the procedure to be followed

while taking recourse of Section 126 of the Act, 2003. For

ready reference, the said clause is being referred as

hereunder :-
 
 ―15.8 Method for assessment of electricity charges
 in case of theft of electricity
 (i). Whenever a case of theft of energy is detected, the
 Authorized officer shall carry out assessment, in
 accordance with the procedure as laid down in the
 sections below:
 Procedure for booking a case of theft of electricity
 

 (ii). The Licensee or supplier shall publish the list of
the Authorized officers prominently in all the Offices
and the Photo Identity Card issued to such officers
shall indicate so.
 (iii). An Authorized officer, suo motu or on receipt of
reliable information regarding theft of electricity shall
promptly conduct inspection of such premises.
 (iv). The inspection team of the Licensee or supplier,
headed by such Authorised officer shall carry along
with them their Visiting Cards and Photo Identity
Cards. Photo Identity Card should be shown and
Visiting Card handed over to the consumer before
entering the premises. Photo Identity Card of the
Authorised Officer shall clearly indicate that he has
been nominated as Authorized officer as per provisions
of Section 135 of the Act.
 (v). The Authorised officer shall prepare a report giving
details such as connected load, condition of meter
seals, working of meter and mention any irregularity
noticed (such as tampered meter, artificial means
adopted for theft of energy).
 (vi). The report shall clearly indicate whether sufficient
evidence substantiating the fact that theft of energy
was found or not. The details of such evidence should
be recorded in the report.
 (vii). No case for theft shall be booked only on account
of seals on the meter missing or tampered or breakage
of glass window, unless corroborated by consumption
pattern of consumer and such other evidence as may
be available.
 (viii). In case sufficient evidence is found to establish
direct theft of electricity, Licensee or Supplier as per
 Section 135 sub-clause (1 A) of the Act shall disconnect
the supply and seize all material evidence including
wires/cables, meter, service line etc., from the
premises and shall lodge a complaint in writing
relating to the commission of such offence in police
station having jurisdiction within twenty four hours
from the time of such disconnection. The Authorized
 

 officer of the Licensee or Supplier shall within two days
from date of inspection, file a case against the
consumer in designated Special Court as per the
provisions of Section 135 of the Act. Copy of filing shall
be served on the consumer under proper receipt within
two days of such filing.
 (ix). The Authorized officer shall assess the energy
consumption as per the assessment formula given in
ANNEXURE-I to these Regulations, for the entire
period during which such theft of electricity has taken
place and if, however, the period during which such
theft of electricity has taken place can not be
ascertained, such period shall be limited to 12 (twelve)
months immediately preceding the date of inspection
and prepare assessment order on twice (2) the rates as
per applicable tariff and serve on the person under
proper receipt. In case of a regular metered connection,
where a case of theft of electricity is detected, units
allowed to be recorded in the meter for which bills have
been raised by the licensee to the person during the
period, for which the assessment is made, shall be
duly credited to the consumer.
 (x). In case of suspected theft, the Authorised officer
shall remove the old meter under a seizure memo and
seal it in the presence of the consumer/ his
representative and the Authorised officer and the
consumer have to sign on the seal borne on the meter.
The Licensee or supplier shall continue the supply to
the consumer with a new meter. The old meter shall be
tested in the presence of the consumer and the
Authorised officer at a third party facility approved by
the Commission which shall give a test report, in
writing, which alongwith photographs/ videographs
shall constitute evidence thereof. The Authorised
officer shall record reasons to suspect theft in the
premises in his report.
 (xi). The report shall be signed by the Authorized
officer and each member of the inspection team and
the same must be handed over to the consumer or
 
 

his/her representative at site immediately under
proper receipt. In case of refusal by the consumer or
his/her representative to either accept or give a
receipt, a copy of inspection report must be pasted at a
conspicuous place in/outside the premises and
photographed. Simultaneously, the report shall be sent
to the consumer under Registered Post/Speed Post on
the day or the next day of the inspection.
 Provided that, in case of suspected theft, if the
consumption pattern for last one year is reasonably
uniform and is not less than 75% of the assessed
consumption, no further proceedings shall be taken
and the decision shall be communicated to the
consumer under proper receipt within three days and
connection shall be restored through original meter.
 (xii). After detailed examination of the evidence and the
consumption pattern of the consumer, if the Licensee
or supplier is convinced that a prima-facie case is
made out for the abstraction, consumption or use of
electricity dishonestly against the consumer, the
Licensee or supplier shall, within seven days of
inspection, serve a provisional assessment order
assessed as per clause 15.8
(xxi) of these Regulations alongwith show cause notice
to the consumer, giving reasons, as to why a case of
theft should not be booked against such consumer
giving full details for arriving at such decision and
points on which reply has to be submitted. The notice
should clearly state the time, date and place at which
the reply has to be submitted and the designation of
the person to whom it should be addressed.
 (xiii). Incase show cause notice is not served even after
thirty days from date of inspection by the Licensee or
supplier, the case of suspected theft shall be
considered as dropped and no further action can be
initiated against the consumer.
 (xiv). Theft shall not be limited to physical interference
with the meter found during physical inspection. It
shall also include theft committed by resorting to
 
 

external methods such as remote control/ high voltage
injection etc. which interfere with the accurate
registration of energy consumed. Theft of electricity
may be established by analysis of metering data down-loaded by a third party facility approved by the
Commission. In case theft of energy is determined by
way of meter down load, the provisional assessment
order assessed as per clause 15.8 (xxi) of these
Regulations alongwith show cause notice will be sent
to the consumer/user. The notice should clearly state
the time, date and place at which the reply has to be
submitted and the designation of the person to whom
it should be addressed.
 (xv). The person, on whom an order has been served
under clause 15.8 (xii) and (xiv) of these Regulations
shall be entitled to file objections, if any, against the
provisional assessment before the Authorized officer,
who shall, after affording a reasonable opportunity of
hearing to such person, pass a final order of
assessment.
 Consumer s reply submission
(xvi). The consumer shall submit his/ her reply within
fifteen days of receipt of show cause notice to the
concerned officer mentioned in clause 15.8 (xii) and
 (xiv) of these Regulations.
 (xvii). In such cases where the consumer files
objections against the provisional assessment order,
the process of hearing shall be as per clause 15.8
(xviii) and (xix) of these Regulations.
 Hearing in case of suspected theft
(xviii). Within five days from the date of submission of
consumers reply, the Licensee or supplier shall
arrange a hearing with the consumer. The consumer
may be given another opportunity in case he fails to
appear for the hearing. In case, the consumer fails to
appear for the second time, the Licensee may proceed
against the consumer.
 (xix). During the hearing, the Authorized officer shall
give due consideration to the facts submitted by the
 
 

consumer and pass, within five working days, a
speaking order as to whether the case of theft is
established or not. The order shall contain the brief of
inspection report, submissions made by consumer in
his written reply and oral submissions during hearing
and reasons for acceptance or rejections of the same.
Assessment
(xx). In case of the decision based on the consumer s
reply / hearing wherein the case of theft is not
established, no further proceedings shall be required
and electricity connection shall be restored through
original meter.
 (xxi). Where it is established that there is a case of
theft of energy based on the consumer s reply /
hearing, the Authorized officer shall assess the energy
consumption as per the assessment formula given in
ANNEXURE-I to these Regulations, for the entire
period during which such theft of electricity has taken
place and if, however, the period during which such
theft of electricity has taken place can not be
ascertained, such period shall be limited to 12 (twelve)
months immediately preceding the date of inspection
and prepare assessment order on twice (2) the rates as
per applicable tariff and serve on the person under
proper receipt. In case of a regular metered connection,
where a case of theft of electricity is detected, units
allowed to be recorded in the meter for which bills have
been raised by the licensee to the person during the
period, for which the assessment is made, shall be
duly credited to the consumer.
 (xxii). The consumer shall be required to make the
payment within seven days of its proper receipt.
(xxiii). The Licensee or supplier, as the case may be, on
deposit or payment of the assessed amount or
electricity charges in accordance with the provision of
these regulations, shall, without prejudice to the
obligation to lodge the complaint as referred to in the
second proviso to the clause 13(A) (1 A) of the
Electricity (Amendment) Act, 2007 , restore the supply
 
 

 line of electricity within forty eight hours of such
 deposit or payment.
 (xxiv). If the person does not make payment within the
 stipulated time, the Licensee or supplier shall proceed
 to recover its dues against the assessment order.
 (xxv). In all cases where theft of electricity has been
 detected, the Licensee or supplier shall file the case
 with Appropriate Court for decision in the matter
 unless the offence is compounded under Section 152 
 of the Act.
 (xxvi). In case of default by the person in payment of
 assessed amount, the person, in addition to the
 assessed amount, shall be liable to pay, on expiry of
 thirty days from the date of order of assessment, an
 amount of interest at the rate of sixteen per cent per
 annum compounded every six months pending
 adjudication by Appropriate Court.‖

 16. The plea which is being taken on behalf of the writ

petitioner that the procedure as laid down under Section 126 

of the Electricity Act, 2003 read with Clause 15.8 of the

Supply Code, has not been followed since there is no

provisional assessment reason being that nothing was

communicated to the writ petitioner or its representative and,

therefore, the vital opportunity to make an objection as was

to be made in view of the provision of Section 126(3) has not

been provided and, therefore, there is gross violation of

statutory provision as contained under Section 126 and in

that view of the matter, the entire demand is unwarranted.

 The further admitted fact is that for the said allegation

an FIR was also instituted being Balidih P.S. Case no.93 of
 
 

2012, however, the aforesaid criminal case has finally

culminated into acquittal of the writ petitioner.

 The judgment of the trial court has been appended to

the paper book which this Court has considered and found

therefrom that the prosecuting agency has failed to establish

the charges on the ground of inadmissibility of the evidence.

 17. The writ petitioner, in view of such acquittal as also in

view of the fact that the procedure as laid under Section 126 

of the Act, 2003 read with Clause 15.8 of the Electricity

Supply Code, is insisting to interfere with the impugned

demand with a prayer to direct the respondent DVC to refund

the amount already deposited by virtue of interim order dated

26.07.2012 to the tune of Rs.75 lacs and at the time of

getting anticipatory bail to the tune of Rs.25 lacs by virtue of

order passed in A.B.A. No.3213 of 2012.
 
 Therefore, main plea of the writ petitioner for interfering

with the demand first is acquittal of the writ petitioner from

the criminal charges and second is non-observance of the

process stipulated under Section 126 of the Act, 2003 read

with Clause 15.8 of the Electricity Supply Code.

 18. The aforesaid contention could have been accepted

when the proceeding initiated under Section 135 of the Act,

2003 pertaining to theft of electricity is having any bearing

upon the proceeding initiated under Section 126 of the Act,

2003 for unauthorized use of electricity. But that is not the
 
 

 legal position, as has been held by Hon ble Apex Court in

West Bengal state Electricity Distribution Company

Limited Vs Orion Metal Private Limited and Another 

(Supra) and in Executive Engineer Southern Electricity

Supply Company Orissa Ltd. (SOUTHCO) Anr. v. Sri

Seetaram Rice Mill (Supra), rather the proposition has been

laid down by interpreting the provision of Section 126 and

 135 of the Act, 2003 by taking into consideration the reason

for enactment of the Electricity Act, 2003 in supersession of

the Indian Electricity Act, 1910 , the Electricity (Supply) Act,

1948 and the Electricity Regulatory Commission Act, 1998 

that is to prevent the misutilization of electricity in both

ways, i.e., by preventing the theft by dealing with the issue of

theft under Section 135 while simultaneously to deal with

such consumption which is being made unauthorizedly to be

dealt with under the provision of Section 126 of the Act,

2003. 
 
 19. This Court, therefore, is of the view that what is being

contended on behalf of the petitioner that merely because the

writ petitioner was acquitted from the criminal case, there

cannot be any liability under Section 126 of the Act, 2003 is

not fit to be accepted in view of the law laid down by the

Hon ble Apex Court in West Bengal State Electricity

Distribution Company Limited Vs Orion Metal Private

Limited and Another (Supra) and in Executive Engineer 
 
 

Southern Electricity Supply Company Orissa Ltd.

(SOUTHCO) Anr. v. Sri Seetaram Rice Mill (Supra) and,

therefore, the same is hereby rejected.
 
 20. Now the second question is that the procedure as

stipulated under Section 126 of the Act, 2003, i.e., providing

copy of the provisional assessment as has been made under

Sub-section (1), to be communicated to the concerned in view

of provision of Sub-section (2) for the purpose of filing

objection in view of the provision of Sub-section (3) since has

not been followed, therefore, the demand so made is

unwarranted.
 
 21. This Court, in order to go into the issue deeper, has

called upon the records pertaining to the inspection so

conducted which is said to be in the light of the provision of

 Section 126 of the Act, 2003, as would appear from the order

dated 26.04.2022 by virtue of the same the record of

inspection has been produced. The same has been perused

by this Court which is one page report showing certain

figures along with signature of the engineers of the inspecting

team. But as to whether the same has been served upon the

person in occupation or possession or in charge of the place

or premises in such manner as may be prescribed as

provided under Section 126(2) of the Act, 2003 is not clear.

 The writ petitioner is taking the plea that the copy of the

said provisional report has never been served upon him while
 
 

on the other hand, the plea of the respondent DVC is that the

representative of the petitioner unit has refused to receive it.

 22. The writ petitioner, thus, is taking the plea of non-observance of the statutory provision as provided under

 Section 126 of the Act, 2003 while countering the said plea

the learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of respondent

DVC has submitted that since the very issue pertains to

revenue of the licensee, i.e., DVC, and on such technical

ground the entire demand may not be interfered with, rather

it would be just and proper to remand the matter before the

assessing authority for taking a decision after following the

provision as contained under Section 126 of the Act, 2003 by

taking into consideration the object and aim of enactment of

the Act, 2003 which is for the purpose of unauthorized use of

electricity or theft of electricity.
 
 23. This Court, therefore, is now to consider that as to

whether on technical ground the entire proceeding initiated

under Section 126 of the Act, 2003 requires interference, if

the process laid down under Section 126 of the Act, 2003 has

not been followed and if it is being quashed, then whether it

be remitted before the respondents for taking a fresh decision

after observing the statutory mandate as provided under

 Section 126 of the Act, 2003.
 
 24. The law is well settled that on technicality no one can be

allowed to take plea for his advantage, rather the object of the
 
 

governing Act is to be considered as a whole. Herein, the

Electricity Act has been enacted also for one important factor,

i.e., after a period of time the performance of Electricity

Boards has deteriorated substantially on account of various

facts, one of the factors was theft of electricity and

unauthorized use of electricity and that is the reason the

provision of Section 126 has been inserted in the Act for

assessment of the unauthorized use of electricity, if the

electricity are being used unauthorizedly without any

intention.
 
 In the given facts of the case, it is the case of the writ

petitioner that the provisional assessment, if any, the copy of

the same ought to have been supplied to the writ petitioner so

that objection could have been filed and only thereafter, if

there will be any final assessment of the unauthorized use of

electricity then only the demand ought to have been raised.

But the copy of the provisional assessment since has not

been supplied, as required to be supplied under Section

126(2) of the Act, 2003 and, as such, in absentia of the same,

there should not have been any demand on behalf of the

respondents upon the writ petitioner.
 
 25. This Court is not in disagreement with the aforesaid

contention by taking into consideration the provision as

contained under Section 126 of the Act, 2003 and a decision

is required to be taken strictly in accordance with the
 
 

 statutory provision on the basis of the principle that when a

statute provides that a particular thing should be done, it

should be done in the manner prescribed and not in any

other manner, as has been held by Hon ble Apex Court in

 State of Uttar Pradesh vs. Singhara Singh and Ors. , [AIR

(1964) SC 358], wherein at paragraph 8 it has been held as

under: 
 
 ―8. ... ... its result is that if a statute has
 conferred a power to do an act and has laid down the
 method in which that power has to be exercised, it
 necessarily prohibits the doing of the act in any other
 manner than that which has been prescribed. The
 principle behind the rule is that if this were not so, the
 statutory provision might as well not have been
 enacted....‖

 Further the Hon ble Apex Court in Babu Verghese and

Ors. vs. Bar Council of Kerala and Ors. , [(1999) 3 SCC

422], at paragraphs 31 32 held as under: 
 
 ―31. It is the basic principle of law long settled that if
 the manner of doing a particular act is prescribed
 under any statute, the act must be done in that
 manner or not at all. The origin of this rule is traceable
 to the decision in Taylor v. Taylor which was followed
 by Lord Roche in Nazir Ahmad v. King Emperor who
 stated as under: 
 ―[W]here a power is given to do a certain thing in
 a certain way, the thing must be done in that
 way or not at all.‖
 32. This rule has since been approved by this Court in
 Rao Shiv Bahadur Singh v. State of V.P. and again in
 Deep Chand v. State of Rajasthan . These cases were
 considered by a three-judge bench of this Court in
 State of U.P. v. Singhara Singh and the rule laid down 
 

 in Nazir Ahmad case was again upheld. This rule has
 since been applied to the exercise of jurisdiction by
 courts and has also been recognized as a statutory
 principle of administrative law.‖ 
 26. Admittedly, from perusal of the records it appears

that the copy of the provisional assessment has not been

supplied to the writ petitioner, however, plea is being

taken on behalf of the respondents that the

representative of petitioner had refused to accept it while

the petitioner is claiming that the same has not been

supplied.
 
 This Court is not entering into the said controversy

but the fact remains that the demand has been issued

without considering the objection and without making

final assessment, therefore, the demand requires

interference.
 
 27. This Court deems it fit and proper to remit the

matter before the competent authority i.e., Chief

Engineer (Commercial), Damodar Valley Corporation

(Respondent No.3), to take fresh decision strictly in

accordance with the procedure laid down under Section

126 of the Act, 2003 without being prejudiced by the

order passed by this Court, within a period of three

months from the date of receipt of the copy of this order.

 So far as the prayer made about refund of amount

already deposited by the writ petitioner is concerned, the
 
 

 same will depend upon the final decision to be taken by

 the respondent DVC, as directed hereinabove.

 28. Accordingly, the instant writ petition stands

 disposed of.
 
 

 (Dr. Ravi Ranjan, C.J.)
 I agree

 (Dr. Ravi Ranjan, C.J.) (Sujit Narayan Prasad, J.)

Birendra/ A.F.R.
