Assistant Engineer (D1) Ajmer Vidyut ... vs Rahamatullah Khan Alias Rahamjulla on 18 February, 2020 

 Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2020 SC 208, (2020) 4 SCALE 36 

 Author: Indu Malhotra 

 Bench: Uday Umesh Lalit , Indu Malhotra , Hemant Gupta 

 REPORTABLE

 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
 CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

 CIVIL APPEAL NO.1672 OF 2020
 (Arising out of SLP (Civil) No. 5190 of 2019)

 Assistant Engineer (D1), Ajmer Vidyut …Appellant(s)
 Vitran Nigam Limited Anr.

 versus

 Rahamatullah Khan alias Rahamjulla …Respondent(s)

 WITH C.A.NO.1673/2020 @ SLP©NO.4721/2020 @
 D.NO.33892/2018

 JUDGMENT
 

 INDU MALHOTRA, J.
 
 

 Delay condoned. Leave granted.
 
 a) The issues which have arisen for consideration in the

 present Civil Appeal are : –
 Signature Not Verified 

 Digitally signed by 
 MUKESH KUMAR 
 Date: 2020.02.18 
 17:17:12 IST 
 Reason: 

  b) What is the meaning to be ascribed to the term “first due”

 in Section 56(2) of the Electricity Act, 2003?

 c) In the case of a wrong billing tariff having been applied on

 account of a mistake, when would the amount become “first

 due”?
 
 d) Whether recourse to disconnection of electricity supply may

 be taken by the licensee company after the lapse of two

 years in case of a mistake?
 
 

 1. The factual matrix in which the aforesaid issues have arisen

 for our consideration is : –

 1.1 In the present case, for the period July, 2009 to

 September, 2011, the Respondent along with other

 consumers were billed by the licensee company (the

 Appellant herein) under Tariff Code 4400 @Rs.1.65 per

 unit.
 
 1.2 During the course of a regular audit being conducted by

 the Internal Audit Party, it was discovered that in 52

 cases, including that of the Respondent, the bills were

 raised under the wrong Tariff Code 4400, instead of

 Tariff Code 9400, under which the prescribed tariff rate

 was Rs.2.10p. per unit.
 
 1.3 On 18.03.2014, the licensee company issued a show

 cause notice to various consumers, including the

 Respondent, raising an additional demand for

 consumption of electricity for the past period from July,

 2009 to September, 2011. It was mentioned in the notice

 that the amount was payable in view of the internal

 audit conducted by the department.
 
 1.4 On 25.05.2015, the licensee company raised a bill

 demanding payment of Rs.29,604/- from the

 Respondent under Tariff Code 9400 for the period July,

 2009 to September, 2011.
 
 1.5 Aggrieved by the said demand, the Respondent filed a

 Consumer Complaint before the District Consumer

 Forum, Ajmer.
 
 The District Forum vide Order dated 21.06.2016,

 allowed the Consumer Complaint, and held that the

 additional demand was time-barred.
 
 1.6 Thereafter, the State Commission vide Order dated

 30.05.2017, allowed the Appeal of the licensee

 company, and set aside the Order dated 21.06.2016

 passed by the District Forum.
 
 1.7 In the Revision Petition filed by the Respondent before

 the National Consumer Disputes Redressal

 Commission, the Order passed by the State Commission

 was set aside. The National Commission held that the

 additional demand was barred by limitation under

 Section 56(2) of the Electricity Act, 2003 (“the Act”).

 1.8 The licensee company has filed the present Civil Appeals

 before this Court to challenge the final judgment dated

 28.05.2018 passed by the National Commission.

 1.9 This Court vide Order dated 05.03.2019 appointed Mr.

 Devashish Bharuka as Amicus Curiae to assist this

 Court on the issues raised for determination.

 It was further directed that the Appellant –

 Corporation would not be entitled to recover the

 additional demand from the Respondent in this case,

 and only the questions of law would be determined.

 2. We have heard the learned Counsel on behalf of the Appellant

 – Corporation and the learned Amicus Curiae.

 3. Mr. Puneet Jain represented the licensee company, and

 submitted that the power to disconnect electricity supply

 under Section 56(1) of the Act may be exercised by the licensee

 company when a consumer neglects to pay the electricity

 charges, or any other sums due and payable by him. The

 neglect to pay the “sum due” by a consumer, necessarily

 requires that there should be a “demand” of the sum due from

 the consumer, which he is required to pay within the period

 stipulated. If the demand is not paid within the stipulated

 time, then the power of disconnection under Section 56(1) may

 be resorted to.
 
 3.1 It was further submitted that when a bill or demand is

 raised, which is disputed by the consumer, he may raise

 the dispute before the Authorities as provided by Section

 42(5) or 42(6) of the Act, or avail such other remedies as

 may be available in law, such as a suit for declaration

 and injunction; consumer dispute before the consumer

 fora; arbitration if provided by the governing agreement.

 3.2 Section 56(1) of the Act confers the power of

 disconnection of electricity supply for default of

 payment upon a licensee, and provides the conditions

 when such a power may be invoked, the procedure and

 manner of the exercise of such power, the period for

 which such power can remain effective, and the

 circumstances under which such a power cannot be

 exercised.
 
 3.3 Sub-section (2) of Section 56 bars the remedy of

 disconnection of supply for default of payment, if the

 consumer deposits the amount demanded under

 protest, or if the demand has been raised two years after

 the sum became “first due”, albeit the same had been

 continuously shown to be recoverable as arrears of

 charges.
 
 3.4 The word “due” has been used under Section 56(1) as

 well as under Section 56(2) . The term “due” refers to the

 amount for which the demand is raised by way of a bill.

 The term “first due” would therefore imply when the

 demand is raised for the first time. The bill raised by the

 licensee company would be the starting point for the

 exercise of power under sub-section (1) of Section 56 .

 3.5 The starting point of limitation would be from the date

 when the bill is raised by the licensee company. The bar

 of limitation is applicable only on the exercise of power

 of disconnection. As per sub-section (2) of Section 56 ,

 the bar of limitation would be two years from the date

 when the first bill is raised.
 
 3.6 It was further submitted that in case of a mistake, the

 starting point of limitation should be the date when the

 mistake is discovered.
 
 In the present case, during a regular internal audit

 conducted on 18.03.2014, it was discovered that a

 mistake had occurred in 52 cases, including that of the

 Respondent, as the bills were raised under the wrong

 Tariff Code. The Appellant–Corporation raised

 additional demands on 25.05.2015, i.e., within two

 years from the discovery of the mistake.

 4. The learned Amicus Curiae submitted that Section 56(1) of the

 Act empowers the licensee to disconnect the electricity supply

 if the consumer neglects to pay his dues. The disconnection

 would take place only after the consumer has consumed the

electricity, and the bill has been generated. If the consumer

neglects to pay the bill served on him within the stipulated

period, the licensee can resort to coercive modes of recovery

provided in the Act.
 
 4.1 The words “first due” used in the first part of sub-section

 (2) of Section 56 is used in the context of the sum

 quantified by the licensee in the bill; while the second

 part of sub-section (2) of Section 56 indicates the date

 when the first bill for the supply of electricity was raised

 by the licensee under the applicable State Electricity

 Supply Code.
 
 4.2 By treating the words “first due” to mean the date of

 detection of mistake, would dilute the mandate of the

 two year limitation period provided by Section 56(2) ,

 since a mistake may be detected at any point of time.

 Furthermore, the words “recoverable as arrears of

 charges” would be rendered completely otiose and

 nugatory.
 
 4.3 The period of limitation under Section 56(2) cannot be

 extended by raising a supplementary bill. The “sum due”

 raised in the original bill, and not paid by the consumer,

 must be continuously shown as arrears of charges in

 subsequent bills, for it to become recoverable by taking

 recourse to the coercive mode of disconnection of

 electricity supply.
 
 4.4 If after the expiry of two years of the original demand,

 any genuine or bona fide mistake is detected by the

 licensee in the original bill, it would be entitled to raise

 a supplementary bill. The licensee company would be

 entitled to resort to other modes of recovery, but not by

 disconnection of supply under sub-section (1) of Section

 56 of the 2003 Act.
 
 

 6. Findings and Analysis

 The Electricity Act, 2003 is a consumer-friendly statute.1 The

 Statement of Objects and Reasons to the Act notes that over a

 period of time, the performance of State Electricity Boards had

 deteriorated on account of various factors, and the need was

 felt to frame a self-contained comprehensive legislation, which

 led to the enactment of the Electricity Act, 2003 .

 6.1 Electricity has been held to be “goods” by a Constitution

 Bench in State of Andhra Pradesh v. National Thermal

 Power Corporation Ltd.2 Under the Sale of Goods Act ,

 1930 a purchaser of goods is liable to pay for it at the

 time of purchase or consumption. The quantum and

 time of payment may be ascertained post facto either by

 way of an agreement or the relevant statute. 

 In the case of electricity, the charges are

 ascertained and recovered as per the tariff notified by

 the State Electricity Board, or under an electricity

 supply agreement between the parties read with the

 tariff under Section 62(1)(d) , and the Electricity Supply

 Code framed under Section 50 .
 
 6.2 The present Civil Appeal pertains to the interpretation

 of Section 56 of the Act which reads as follows : –

 “ Section 56 . Disconnection of supply in
 default of payment –

 (1) Where any person neglects to pay any
 charge for electricity or any sum other than a
 charge for electricity due from him to a licensee
 or the generating company in respect of supply,
 transmission or distribution or wheeling of
 electricity to him, the licensee or the generating
 company may, after giving not less than fifteen
 clear days’ notice in writing, to such person and

 
 

 without prejudice to his rights to recover such
 charge or other sum by suit, cut off the supply
 of electricity and for that purpose cut or
 disconnect any electric supply line or other
 works being the property of such licensee or the
 generating company through which electricity
 may have been supplied, transmitted,
 distributed or wheeled and may discontinue
 the supply until such charge or other sum,
 together with any expenses incurred by him in
 cutting off and reconnecting the supply, are
 paid, but no longer:
 
 Provided that the supply of electricity shall not
 be cut off if such person deposits, under
 protest, -
 a) an amount equal to the sum claimed from
 him, or
 b) the electricity charges due from him for each
 month calculated on the basis of average
 charge for electricity paid by him during the
 preceding six months,
 whichever is less, pending disposal of any
 dispute between him and the licensee.
 
 (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any
 other law for the time being in force, no sum due
 from any consumer, under this section shall be
 recoverable after the period of two years from
 the date when such sum became first due
 unless such sum has been shown continuously
 as recoverable as arrear of charges for
 electricity supplied and the licensee shall not
 cut off the supply of the electricity.”
 (emphasis supplied)

 Section 56 provides for disconnection of supply in

the case of default in payment of electricity charges.
 
 Sub-section (1) of Section 56 provides that where any

person “neglects” to pay “any charge” for electricity, or

“any sum” other than a charge for electricity due from

 him to a licensee or generating company, the licensee

 after giving 15 days’ written notice, may disconnect the

 supply of electricity, until such charges or other sums

 due, including the expenses incurred, are paid.

 However, the disconnection cannot continue after the

 amounts are paid.
 
 6.3 The obligation of a consumer to pay electricity charges

 arises after the bill is issued by the licensee company.

 The bill sets out the time within which the charges are

 to be paid. If the consumer fails to pay the charges

 within the stipulated period, they get carried forward to

 the next bill as arrears.
 
 6.4 The proviso to Section 56(1) carves out an exception by

 providing that the disconnection will not be effected if

 the consumer either deposits the amount “under

 protest”, or deposits the average charges paid during the

 preceding six months.
 
 6.5 Sub-section (2) of Section 56 by a non obstante clause

 provides that notwithstanding anything contained in

 any other law for the time being in force, no sum due

 from any consumer, shall be recoverable under Section

 56 , after the expiry of two years from the date when the

 sum became “first due”, unless such sum was shown

 continuously recoverable as arrears of charges for the

 electricity supplied, nor would the licensee company

 disconnect the electricity supply of the consumer.

 The effect of a non obstante clause was explained

 by this Court in Chandavarkar Sita Ratna Rao v.

 Ashalata S. Guram.3 It was held that : –

 “69. A clause beginning with the expression
 ‘notwithstanding anything contained in this Act
 or in some particular provision in the Act or in
 some particular Act or in any law for the time
 being in force, or in any contract’ is more often
 than not appended to a section in the beginning
 with a view to give the enacting part of the
 section in case of conflict an overriding effect
 over the provision of the Act or the contract
 mentioned in the non-obstante clause. It is
 equivalent to saying that in spite of the
 provision of the Act or any other Act mentioned
 in the non-obstante clause or any contract or
 document mentioned the enactment following it
 will have its full operation or that the provisions
 embraced in the non-obstante clause would not
 be an impediment for an operation of the
 enactment.”
 (emphasis supplied)

 6.6. The liability to pay arises on the consumption of

 electricity. The obligation to pay would arise when the

 
 

 bill is issued by the licensee company, quantifying the

 charges to be paid.
 
 Electricity charges would become “first due” only

 after the bill is issued to the consumer, even though the

 liability to pay may arise on the consumption of

 electricity.
 
 

 7. The next issue is as to whether the period of limitation of two

 years provided by Section 56(2) of the Act, would be applicable

 to an additional or supplementary demand.

 7.1 Prior to the coming into force of the Electricity Act, 2003 ,

 the Indian Electricity Act, 1910 governed the law

 pertaining to the use and supply of electricity in India.

 Section 24 of the Indian Electricity Act, 1910 read as

 follows :–

 “24. Discontinuance of supply to consumer
 neglecting to pay charge.
 
 (1) Where any person neglects to pay any
 charge for energy or any sum, other than a
 charge for energy, due from him to a licensee in
 respect of the supply of energy to him, the
 licensee may, after giving not less than seven
 clear days’ notice in writing to such person and
 without prejudice to his right to recover such
 charge or other sum by suit, cut off the supply
 and for that purpose cut or disconnect any
 electric supply-line or other works being the

 property of the licensee, through which energy
 may be supplied, and may discontinue the
 supply until such charger or other sum, together
 with ally expenses incurred by him in cutting
 off and reconnecting the supply, are paid, but
 no longer.
 
 (2) Where any difference or dispute which by or
 under this Act is required to be determined by
 an Electrical Inspector, has been referred to the
 Inspector before notice as aforesaid has been
 given by the licensee, the licensee shall not
 exercise the powers conferred by this section
 until the Inspector has given his decision:
 Provided that the prohibition contained in this
 subsection shall not apply in any case in which
 the licensee has made a request in writing to
 the consumer for a deposit with the Electrical
 Inspector of the amount of the licensee’s
 charges or other sums in dispute or for the
 deposit of the licensee’s further charges for
 energy as they accrue, and the consumer has
 failed to comply with such request.”

 The Standing Committee of Energy in its Report

dated 19.12.2002 submitted to the 13th Lok Sabha,

opined that Section 56 of the 2003 Act is based on

 Section 24 of the 1910 Act.
 
 
 The Standing Committee further opined that a

restriction has been added for recovery of arrears

pertaining to the period prior to two years from

consumers, unless the arrears have been continuously

shown in the bills. Justifying the addition of this

restriction, the Ministry of Power submitted that : –

 “It has been considered necessary to provide
 for such a restriction to protect the consumers
 from arbitrary billings.”

 7.2 In Swastic Industries v. Maharashtra State Electricity

 Board,4 this Court while interpreting Section 24 of the

 Indian Electricity Act, 1910 held that : –

 “5. It would, thus, be clear that the right to
 recover the charges is one part of it and right to
 discontinue supply of electrical energy to the
 consumer who neglects to pay charges is
 another part of it.”
 (emphasis supplied)

 7.3 Sub-section (1) of Section 56 confers a statutory right to

 the licensee company to disconnect the supply of

 electricity, if the consumer neglects to pay the electricity

 dues. 
 
 This statutory right is subject to the period of

 limitation of two years provided by sub-section (2) of

 Section 56 of the Act.
 
 7.4 The period of limitation of two years would commence

 from the date on which the electricity charges became

 “first due” under sub-section (2) of Section 56 . This

 
 

 provision restricts the right of the licensee company to

 disconnect electricity supply due to non-payment of

 dues by the consumer, unless such sum has been

 shown continuously to be recoverable as arrears of

 electricity supplied, in the bills raised for the past

 period.
 
 If the licensee company were to be allowed to

 disconnect electricity supply after the expiry of the

 limitation period of two years after the sum became “first

 due”, it would defeat the object of Section 56(2) .

 8. Section 56(2) however, does not preclude the licensee company

 from raising a supplementary demand after the expiry of the

 limitation period of two years. It only restricts the right of the

 licensee to disconnect electricity supply due to non-payment

 of dues after the period of limitation of two years has expired,

 nor does it restrict other modes of recovery which may be

 initiated by the licensee company for recovery of a

 supplementary demand.
 
 

 9. Applying the aforesaid ratio to the facts of the present case,

 the licensee company raised an additional demand on

 18.03.2014 for the period July, 2009 to September, 2011.

 The licensee company discovered the mistake of billing

 under the wrong Tariff Code on 18.03.2014. The limitation

 period of two years under Section 56(2) had by then already

 expired.
 
 Section 56(2) did not preclude the licensee company from

 raising an additional or supplementary demand after the

 expiry of the limitation period under Section 56(2) in the case

 of a mistake or bona fide error. It did not however, empower

 the licensee company to take recourse to the coercive measure

 of disconnection of electricity supply, for recovery of the

 additional demand.
 
 As per Section 17(1)(c) of the Limitation Act, 1963, in case

 of a mistake, the limitation period begins to run from the date

 when the mistake is discovered for the first time.

 In Mahabir Kishore and Ors. v. State of Madhya Pradesh,5 

 this Court held that :–

 
 

 “ Section 17(1)(c) of the Limitation Act, 1963,
 provides that in the case of a suit for relief on
 the ground of mistake, the period of limitation
 does not begin to run until the plaintiff had
 discovered the mistake or could with
 reasonable diligence, have discovered it. In a
 case where payment has been made under a
 mistake of law as contrasted with a mistake of
 fact, generally the mistake become known to
 the party only when a court makes a
 declaration as to the invalidity of the law.
 Though a party could, with reasonable
 diligence, discover a mistake of fact even before
 a court makes a pronouncement, it is seldom
 that a person can, even with reasonable
 diligence, discover a mistake of law before a
 judgment adjudging the validity of the law.”
 (emphasis supplied)

 In the present case, the period of limitation would

 commence from the date of discovery of the mistake i.e.

 18.03.2014. The licensee company may take recourse to any

 remedy available in law for recovery of the additional demand,

 but is barred from taking recourse to disconnection of supply

 of electricity under sub-section (2) of Section 56 of the Act.

 10. We extend our appreciation to Mr. Devashish Bharuka,

 Advocate who has very ably assisted this Court as Amicus

 Curiae.
 
 

 The present Civil Appeals are accordingly disposed of in the

 aforesaid terms.
 
 All pending Applications, if any, are accordingly disposed of.

 Ordered accordingly.
 
 

 .....................................J.
 (UDAY UMESH LALIT)

 .…...............………………J.
 (INDU MALHOTRA)

New Delhi,
February 18, 2020
