West Bengal State Electricity ... vs M/S Orion Metal Pvt. Ltd. on 21 August, 2019 

 Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2019 SC 982, (2019) 11 SCALE 230, (2019) 4 JCR 101 (SC), (2019) 4 PAT LJR 222 

 Author: R. Subhash Reddy 

 Bench: R. Subhash Reddy , R. Banumathi 

 REPORTABLE

 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

 CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

 CIVIL APPEAL No.6547 OF 2019
 [Arising out of S.L.P.(C) No.22207 of 2018]

 West Bengal State Electricity
 Distribution Company Ltd. Ors. … Appellants

 Versus

 M/s. Orion Metal Pvt. Ltd. Anr. … Respondents

 J U D G M E N T
 
 R. Subhash Reddy, J.
 
 
 1. Leave granted.
 
 2. This civil appeal is filed by the appellant- West

 Bengal State Electricity Distribution Company Limited

 and others, aggrieved by the judgment and order dated

 18.12.2017 passed by the High Court of Calcutta in

 F.M.A. No.520 of 2017 and the corrected order dated
 Signature Not Verified 

 Digitally signed by 
 ANITA MALHOTRA 
 Date: 2019.08.21 

 07.02.2018. By the impugned order, the intra Court
17:18:24 IST
Reason:

 appeal preferred by the respondent company was

 allowed by the Division Bench of High Court.
 

 3. Necessary facts, in brief, are as under:
 

 (a) The 1st respondent herein is the consumer of

 electricity from the appellant- West Bengal State

 Electricity Distribution Company Limited Ors. There

 is a supply agreement entered into between the

 parties on 22.12.2004. The officials of the appellant

 company served a notice dated 28.10.2016 upon the 1st

 respondent, in exercise of power under Class IV of

 the West Bengal Electricity Regulatory Commission

 Electricity Supply Code, 2007 for conducting an

 inspection in the metering system of the respondent.
 
 The respondent-company is a centralized bulk high

 voltage consumer of electricity in the Hooghly

 region, with a contracted load of 1450 KVA. After

 service of notice on the 1st respondent on 28.10.2016,

 inspection was made by the Superintending Engineer,

 Divisional Engineer, Divisional Engineer (Manager),

 Assistant Engineer of Chandanangore Division, in the

 premises of the respondent herein.

 (b) During the inspection, it was noticed by the

 inspecting team that input current is abnormally high

 from output current at TTB end in respect of the R 

 B Phase of PT secondary wires. The inspecting team on

 breaking open the TTB has also found some foreign

 material inside. In view of such discrepancies found

 during the inspection, the inspection team was of the

 view that there was a theft of energy by tampering

 the meter by the respondent-company. The three-phase

 meter and the metering equipment was seized by the

 inspecting team by preparing a seizure list. In view

 of such discrepancies noticed during inspection, in

 exercise of power under Section 126(1) of the

 Electricity Act, 2003 (for short ‘the Act’),

 provisional assessment for loss of energy by

 un-metered consumption was made by one Mr. B. Saha,

 Superintending Engineer/Assessing Officer of the

 appellant-company. The provisional assessment was

 made assessing the value of energy which was consumed

 on account of un-metered consumption at

 Rs.13,41,17,482-30 paise (Rupees thirteen crores

 forty one lakhs seventeen thousand four hundred and

 eighty two only).

 (c) After inspection, a criminal complaint was also

 lodged before the local police by the Superintending

 Engineer (Commercial), Hooghly region, of the

 appellant company, complaining theft of energy by the

 respondent. In the complaint made by the appellant,

 it was alleged that by inserting a foreign material

 into the meter, the respondent-company has indulged

 in theft of energy.
 
 (d) On the basis of criminal complaint made by the

 Superintending Engineer (Commercial), a criminal case

 has been registered against the respondent-company

 and the police have submitted a charge-sheet in the

 criminal case.
 
 
 (e) Aggrieved by the provisional assessment and the

 consequential demand, the respondents have filed writ

 petition in W.P. No.30449(W) of 2016 before the High

 Court, questioning the jurisdiction of the Assessing

 Officer in issuing the provisional assessment and the

 consequential demand for a sum of Rs.13,41,17,482-30

 paise. In the writ petition, one of the grounds was

 that the Assessing Officer, who prepared the

 provisional assessment, not being a party to the

 inspection team, had no authority to make the

 provisional assessment under Section 126(1) of the

 Act. In the writ petition, it was alleged that

 provisional assessment made was not in accordance

 with Section 126(1) of the Act, as such, such

 assessment cannot be given effect to.

 (f) Learned single Judge of the High Court, on the

 ground that the appellant-Distribution Company has

 not produced any material to show that the Assessing

 Officer was part of the inspection team, has held

 that assessment and consequential demand made in the

 provisional assessment proceedings was not in

 accordance with Section 126(1) of the Act and quashed

 the same. While allowing the writ petition, the

 learned single Judge has directed the State

 Government to appoint any member of the inspection

 team as an Assessing Officer to make fresh

 assessment.
 
 
 (g) Aggrieved by the order of the learned single

 Judge dated 15.12.2016, the respondent-writ

 petitioners have filed intra Court appeal before the

 High Court. Following the directions, as contained

 in the order passed by the learned single Judge, it

 appears, a Member of the inspection team was

 appointed as an Assessing Officer by the State

 Government and the said officer has provisionally

 assessed the value of un-metered consumption of

 electricity and also made final assessment after

 giving opportunity for filing objections.

 (h) The fresh assessment order, which is made in

 compliance of directions issued by the learned single

 Judge, is also questioned in the pending appeal by

 filing an interlocutory application by the

 respondents. In view of the said interlocutory

 application, the Division Bench of the High Court has

 allowed such application permitting the respondents

 to challenge the fresh assessment made pursuant to

 directions issued by the learned single Judge, and

 passed the impugned order allowing the appeal

 preferred by the respondents.
 
 (i) In the intra Court appeal, before the Division

 Bench, the respondents have raised a ground that two

 parallel proceedings i.e. the criminal complaint

 before the Competent Court and also assessment

 proceedings under Section 126(1) of the Act cannot go

 simultaneously. Precisely, it was the case of the

 respondents that once a complaint is filed, alleging

 theft of energy under Section 135(1)(a) of the Act,

 no assessment is permissible under Section 126(1) of

 the Act.
 
 (j) Before the High Court, it appears that

 respondents have also pleaded that the civil

 liability, if any, of the respondents can be

 determined only under sub-section (5) of Section 154 

 of the Act. While considering the scope of Sections

 154 , 135(1)(a) and 126 of the Act, the High Court has

 held that when a criminal complaint is lodged

 alleging theft of energy by the consumer and when

 supply of electricity is disconnected on account of

 such offence alleged, only in cases where restoration

 of supply is sought by the consumer, agreeing to

 deposit the assessed amount of un-metered

 consumption, provisional assessment can be made under

 Section 126 of the Act. The High Court has drawn a

 distinction to exercise power under Section 126(1) of

 the Act, in cases where consumer seeks restoration of

 supply after disconnection and in cases where

 restoration of supply is not sought for. The High

 Court has held that only in cases where restoration

 is sought after disconnection, authorities can resort

 to make assessment under Section 126(1) of the Act,

 otherwise, the civil liability can be determined by

 Special Court only by following the procedure under

 sub-section (5) of Section 154 of the Act.

 4. We have heard Mr. Jaideep Gupta, learned Senior

 counsel appearing for the appellants and Mr. Gaurav

 Jain, learned counsel for the respondents.

 5. Having heard the learned counsels on both sides,

 we have perused the impugned order and other

 materials placed on record.
 
 
 6. The learned Senior counsel appearing for the

 appellants has submitted that the High Court has

 misconstrued the provisions under Sections 126 , 135 

 and 154 of the Act and erroneously allowed the appeal

 and quashed the assessment order made by the

 appellants under Section 126(1) of the Act. It is

 submitted by learned Senior counsel that, whenever

 there is an allegation of theft of energy by the

 consumer, even after lodging a complaint for

 commission of such offence before the police, it is

 always open for the appellants to make provisional

 and final assessment to recover loss of energy in

 exercise of power under Section 126(1) of the Act.

 Precisely, it is submitted that in all cases covered

 by Section 135 of the Act, it is open for the

 authorities to make provisional assessment under

 Section 126 of the Act. It is submitted that the

 power conferred under Section 126(1) of the Act to

 make provisional assessment, will not depend, whether

 consumer seeks restoration of supply or not, after

 disconnection of supply.
 
 
 (a) It is submitted that to prove theft of energy

 before the Special Court, case has to be proved

 beyond reasonable doubt and further the element of

 mens rea is a sine qua non to prove the guilt of the

 accused. It is submitted that such degree of proof is

 not required for the purpose of assessing loss of

 energy under Section 126(1) of the Act. Learned

 Senior counsel has also placed reliance on the

 judgment in the case of Executive Engineer Southern

 Electricity Supply Company of Orissa Limited

 (SOUTHCO) Another v. Shi. Seetaram Rice Mill1.

 7. On the other hand, learned counsel appearing for

 the respondents, in support of the findings recorded

 by the High Court, has submitted that the

 (2012) 2 SCC 108

 unauthorized use of energy and theft of energy are

 two different aspects covered under different

 provisions of the Act. It is submitted that the power

 conferred for provisional assessment under Section

 126(1) of the Act, is confined to cases where there

 is an allegation of unauthorized use of energy and

 the allegation of theft of energy is to be prosecuted

 only under Section 135(1)(a) of the Act. It is

 submitted that only in cases where authorities prove

 the guilt of the accused, the Special Court is

 empowered to determine civil liability under sub-section (5) of Section 154 of the Act.

 (a) It is further submitted that once power supply

 is disconnected, where there is a request by the

 consumer for restoration of power supply, the

 authorities can make assessment under Section 126(1) 

 of the Act. In support of this plea, the learned

 counsel brought to our notice a judgment of the

 learned single Judge of Madhya Pradesh High Court in

 the case of The Hotel Adityaz Limited v. Madhya

 Pradesh Kshetra Vidyut Vitran Company Limited, Bhopal 

 others2 . In the aforesaid judgment, learned single

 Judge of the High Court has held that where there is

 an allegation of theft of energy, such cases will

 fall only under Section 135 of the Act and Section

 126 of the Act, as no application. 
 
 
 8. Before we proceed further, we have looked into

 the Objects and Reasons of the Electricity Act, 2003,

 and also the relevant provisions i.e Sections 126 ,

 135(1)(a) , 153 and 154 of the Act.
 
 
 9. Prior to Electricity Act, 2003, generation and

 supply of electricity was governed by the provisions

 under Indian Electricity Act, 2010, the Electricity

 (Supply) Act, 1948 and the Electricity Regulatory

 Commissions Act, 1998 . With the policy of the

 Government to encourage private sector participation

 in generation, transmission and distribution of

 energy and with the objective of distancing

 regulatory responsibilities from the Government to

 the Regulatory Commissions, it was felt that there is

 a need for harmonizing and rationalizing the

 provisions of the electricity by bringing a new

 legislation. That is how the Electricity Act, 2003 ,

 was enacted and brought into force. In the objects

 and reasons, a specific reference is made to

 incorporate provisions relating to theft of

 electricity, to have a revenue focus. Part XII of the

 Act deals with the provisions relating to

 investigation and enforcement and Part XIV of the Act 

 deals with the provisions relating to offences and

 penalties. The Constitution of Special Courts and

 procedure and powers of the Special Courts are

 covered by Part XV of the Act .
 
 10. The relevant sections for the disposal of this

 appeal reads as under:
 
 
 “ Section 126 . Assessment:- (1) If on an
 inspection of any place or premises or
 after inspection of the equipments,
 gadgets, machines, devices found
 connected or used, or after inspection
 of records maintained by any person, the
 assessing officer comes to the
 conclusion that such person is indulging
 in unauthorized use of electricity, he
 shall provisionally assess to the best
 of his judgment the electricity charges
 payable by such person or by any other
 person benefited by such use.
 
 (2) The order of provisional assessment
 shall be served upon the person in
 occupation or possession or in charge of
 the place or premises in such manner as
 may be prescribed.
 
 (3) The person, on whom an order has
 been served under sub- section (2),
 shall be entitled to file objections, if
 any, against the provisional assessment
 before the assessing officer, who shall,
 after affording a reasonable opportunity
 of hearing to such person, pass a final
 order of assessment within thirty days

 from the date of service of such order
 of provisional assessment, of the
 electricity charges payable by such
 person.
 
 (4) Any person served with the order of
 provisional assessment may, accept such
 assessment and deposit the assessed
 amount with the licensee within seven
 days of service of such provisional
 assessment order upon him:
 
 (5) If the assessing officer reaches to
 the conclusion that unauthorised use of
 electricity has taken place, the
 assessment shall be made for the entire
 period during which such unauthorized
 use of electricity has taken place and
 if, however, the period during which
 such unauthorised use of electricity has
 taken place cannot be ascertained, such
 period shall be limited to a period of
 twelve months immediately preceding the
 date of inspection.
 
 (6) The assessment under this section
 shall be made at a rate equal to twice
 the tariff applicable for the relevant
 category of services specified in sub-section (5).
 
 Explanation.- For the purposes of this
 section,-
 
 (a) “assessing officer” means an officer
 of a State Government or Board or
 licensee, as the case may be, designated
 as such by the State Government;
 
 (b) “unauthorised use of electricity”
 means the usage of electricity –
 (i) by any artificial means; or

 (ii) by a means not authorised by the
 concerned person or authority or
 licensee; or
 (iii) through a tampered meter; or

 (iv) for the purpose other than for
 which the usage of electricity was
 authorised; or

 (v) for the premises or areas other
 than those for which the supply of
 electricity was authorized.”

 The procedure for ‘theft of energy’ is covered by

 Section 135 of the Act under Part IX. Section 135 of

 the Act reads as under:
 
 
 “ Section 135 . Theft of Electricity:- (1)
 Whoever, dishonestly,-
 
 (a) taps, makes or causes to be made any
 connection with overhead, underground or
 under water lines or cables, or service
 wires, or service facilities of a
 licensee or supplier, as the case may
 be; or

 (b) tampers a meter, installs or uses a
 tampered meter, current reversing
 transformer, loop connection or any
 other device or method which interferes
 with accurate or proper registration,
 calibration or metering of electric
 current or otherwise results in a manner
 whereby electricity is stolen or wasted;
 or

 (c) damages or destroys an electric
 meter, apparatus, equipment, or wire or
 causes or allows any of them to be so
 damaged or destroyed as to interfere
 with the proper or accurate metering of
 electricity; or

 (d) uses electricity through a tampered
 meter; or

 (e) uses electricity for the purpose
 other than for which the usage of
 electricity was authorised,

 so as to abstract or consume or use
 electricity shall be punishable with
 imprisonment for a term which may extend
 to three years or with fine or with
 both:
 
 Provided that in a case where the load
 abstracted, consumed, or used or
 attempted abstraction or attempted
 consumption or attempted use –

 (i) does not exceed 10 kilowatt, the
 fine imposed on first conviction
 shall not be less than three
 times the financial gain on
 account of such theft of
 electricity and in the event of
 second or subsequent conviction
 the fine imposed shall not be
 less than six times the financial
 gain on account of such theft of
 electricity;
 
 (ii) exceeds 10 kilowatt, the fine
 imposed on first conviction shall
 not be less than three times the
 financial gain on account of such
 theft of electricity and in the
 event of second or subsequent
 conviction, the sentence shall be
 imprisonment for a term not less
 than six months, but which may
 extend to five years and with
 fine not less than six times the
 financial gain on account of such
 theft of electricity:
 
 Provided further that in the
 event of second and subsequent
 conviction of a person where the load
 abstracted, consumed, or used or
 attempted abstraction or attempted
 consumption or attempted use exceeds

 10 kilowatt, such person shall also be
 debarred from getting any supply of
 electricity for a period which shall
 not be less than three months but may
 extend to two years and shall also be
 debarred from getting supply of
 electricity for that period from any
 other source or generating station:
 
 Provided also that if it is
 proved that any artificial means or
 means not authorized by the Board or
 licensee or supplier, as the case may
 be, exist for the abstraction,
 consumption or use of electricity by
 the consumer, it shall be presumed,
 until the contrary is proved, that any
 abstraction, consumption or use of
 electricity has been dishonestly
 caused by such consumer.
 
 (1A) Without prejudice to the
 provisions of this Act, the licensee
 or supplier, as the case may be, may,
 upon detection of such theft of
 electricity, immediately disconnect
 the supply of electricity:
 
 Provided that only such officer
 of the licensee or supplier, as
 authorized for the purpose by the
 Appropriate Commission or any other
 officer of the licensee or supplier,
 as the case may be, of the rank higher
 than the rank so authorised shall
 disconnect the supply line of
 electricity:
 
 Provided further that such
 officer of the licensee or supplier,
 as the case may be, shall lodge a
 complaint in writing relating to the
 commission of such offence in police
 station having jurisdiction within
 twenty four hours from the time of
 such disconnect:

 Provided also that the licensee
 or supplier, as the case may be, on
 deposit or payment of the assessed
 amount or electricity charges in
 accordance with the provisions of this
 Act, shall, without prejudice to the
 obligation to lodge the complaint as
 referred to in the second proviso to
 this clause, restore the supply line
 of electricity within forty-eight
 hours of such deposit or payment;]

 (2) Any officer of the licensee or
 supplier as the case may be, authorized
 in this behalf by the State Government
 may –

 (a) enter, inspect, break open and
 search any place or premises in which he
 has reason to believe that electricity
 has been or is being, used
 unauthorisedly;
 

 (b) search, seize and remove all such
 devices, instruments, wires and any
 other facilitator or article which has
 been, or is being, used for unauthorized
 use of electricity;
 
 (c) examine or seize any books of
 account or documents which in his
 opinion shall be useful for or relevant
 to, any proceedings in respect of the
 offence under sub-section (1) and allow
 the person from whose custody such books
 of account or documents are seized to
 make copies thereof or take extracts
 therefrom in his presence.
 
 (3) The occupant of the place of search
 or any person on his behalf shall remain
 present during the search and a list of
 all things seized in the course of such
 search shall be prepared and delivered
 to such occupant or person who shall
 sign the list:

 Provided that no inspection, search
 and seizure of any domestic places or
 domestic premises shall be carried out
 between sunset and sunrise except in the
 presence of an adult male member
 occupying such premises.
 
 (4) The provisions of the Code of
 Criminal Procedure , 1973 (2 of 1974),
 relating to search and seizure shall
 apply, as far as may be, to searches and
 seizure under this Act.”

 The procedure to be followed by the Special Court

 constituted under Section 153 of the Act is

 prescribed under Section 154 of the Act.
 

 Sub-sections (5) and (6) of Section 154 of the Act

 read as under:
 
 
 “(5) The Special Court shall determine
 the civil liability against a consumer
 or a person in terms of money for theft
 of energy which shall not be less than
 an amount equivalent to two times of
 the tariff rate applicable for a period
 of twelve months preceding the date of
 detection of theft of energy or the
 exact period of theft if determined
 whichever is less and the amount of
 civil liability so determined shall be
 recovered as if it were a decree of
 civil court.
 
 (6) In case the civil liability so
 determined finally by the Special Court
 is less than the amount deposited by
 the consumer or the person, the excess
 amount so deposited by the consumer or
 the person, to the Board or licensee or
 the concerned person, as the case may

 be, shall be refunded by the Board or
 licensee or the concerned person, as
 the case may be, within a fortnight
 from the date of communication of the
 order of the Special Court together
 with interest at the prevailing Reserve
 Bank of India prime lending rate for
 the period from the date of such
 deposit till the date of payment.
 
 Explanation.- For the purposes of
 this section, “civil liability” means
 loss or damage incurred by the Board or
 licensee or the concerned person, as
 the case may be, due to the commission
 of an offence referred to in sections
 135 to 140 and section 150 .”

 11. A perusal of the aforesaid provisions and on

 giving a conjoint reading of the same, it appears to

 us that after an inspection of any place or any

 premises of any consumer, when Assessing Officer

 comes to a conclusion that the consumer is indulging

 in unauthorized use of electricity, the provisional

 assessment to the best of his judgment is to be made

 in accordance with Section 126(1) of the Act and such

 provisional assessment shall be served upon the

 person in occupation of the premises. After giving

 an opportunity to file objections to the provisional

 assessment, the Assessing Officer is empowered to

 pass a final order of the assessment assessing the

 loss of energy, on account of unauthorized use of

 energy. The unauthorized use of electricity is

 defined under Section 126(6)(b) of the Act. It is

 clear from the aforesaid definition that unauthorized

 use of electricity means, the usage of electricity by

 any artificial means or by a means not authorized by

 the concerned person or authority or licensee; or

 through a tampered meter; or for the purpose other

 than for which the usage of electricity was

 authorized; or for the premises or areas other than

 those for which the supply of electricity was

 authorized.
 
 
 12. It is clear from the reading of Section 126 (6) 

 (b)(iii) of the Act that instances of use of energy

 through a tampered meter is included in the

 definition of unauthorized use of electricity. If

 that is so, there is no reason, for excluding the

 power of the authorities for making assessment under

 Section 126(1) of the Act to assess the loss of

 energy, where electricity is used through a tampered

 meter. All instances of unauthorized use of energy

 may not amount to theft of electricity within the

 meaning of Section 135 of the Act, but at the same

 time, the theft of electricity which is covered by

 Section 135 of the Act, will fall within the

 definition of unauthorized use of electricity. As per

 Section 135(1A) of the Act, without prejudice to the

 other provisions of the Act, the licensee or

 supplier, as the case may be, upon detection of theft

 of electricity, is empowered to disconnect the power

 supply immediately. Further, as per the third proviso

 to Section 135(1A) of the Act, the licensee or

 supplier, as the case may be, on deposit or payment

 of assessed amount or electricity charges, without

 prejudice to the obligation to lodge a complaint, can

 restore the power supply electricity within forty-eight(48) hours of deposit /payment of such amount.

 Thus, it is clear that the authorities under the Act

 are empowered to make a provisional and final

 assessment by invoking power under Section 126(1) of

 the Act, even in cases where electricity is

 unauthorisedly used by way of theft. When a consumer

 deposits the assessed amount, the licensee or the

 supplier has to restore the power supply. The

 assessed amount referred to in the aforesaid proviso,

 relates to assessment which is contemplated under

 Section 126(1) of the Act only. There is apparent

 distinction between Section 126 and Section 135 of

 the Act. Section 126 forms part of the scheme which

 authorizes electricity supplier to ascertain loss in

 terms of revenue caused to it by the consumer by his

 act of “unauthorized use of electricity” whereas

 Section 135 deals with offence of theft if he is

 found to have indulged himself in the acts mentioned

 in clauses (a) to (e) of sub-section (1) of Section

 135 of Electricity Act. Further, it is also clear

 from Section 154 of the Act, which prescribes

 procedure and power of Special Court, that the

 Special Court is empowered to convict the consumer

 and impose a sentence of imprisonment. The Special

 Court, in cases, where a criminal complaint is

 lodged, is also empowered to determine civil

 liability under Section 154(5) of the Act. As per

 Section 154(6) of the Act, in case civil liability so

 determined by the Special Court is less than the

 amount deposited by the consumer or the person, the

 excess amount so deposited by the consumer or the

 person, shall be refunded by the licensee or the

 concerned person, as the case may be. Merely because

 the Special Court is empowered to determine civil

 liability under Section 154(5) of the Act, in cases

 where a complaint is lodged, it cannot be said that

 there is no power conferred on authorities to make

 provisional assessment/final assessment under Section

 126 of the Act.
 
 
 13. In the case of Executive Engineer Southern

 Electricity Supply Company of Orissa Limited

 (SOUTHCO) Another v. Shi. Seetaram Rice Mill,

 reported in (2012)2 SCC 108, this Court has

 considered the scope of Explanation to Section 126(b)

 (iv) of 2003 Act. In the aforesaid case, as there was

 no allegation of theft, this Court has held

 consumption in excess of sanctioned/contracted load,

 comes within the meaning of unauthorized use of

 electricity as per Explanation (b)(iv) of Section 126 

 of Electricity Act, 2003. Drawing a distinction

 between Section 126 to that of Section 135 of the

 Act, paragraphs 29 and 61 of the aforesaid judgment

 read as under:-
 
 “29. Thus, it would be clear that the
 expression “unauthorized use of
 electricity” under Section 126 of the
 2003 Act deals with cases of unauthorized
 use, even in the absence of intention.
 These cases would certainly be different
 from cases where there is dishonest
 abstraction of electricity by any of the
 methods enlisted under Section 135 of the
 2003 Act. A clear example would be, where
 a consumer has used excessive load as
 against the installed load simpliciter

 and there is violation of the terms and
 conditions of supply, then, the case
 would fall under Section 126 of the 2003
 Act. On the other hand, where a consumer,
 by any of the means and methods as
 specified under Sections 135(a) to 135(e) 
 of the 2003 Act, has abstracted energy
 with dishonest intention and without
 authorization, like providing for a
 direct connection by passing the
 installed meter, the case would fall
 under Section 135 of the Act.
 ... ... ... ...
 61. Unauthorized use of electricity
 cannot be restricted to the stated
 clauses under the Explanation but has to
 be given a wider meaning so as to cover
 cases of violation of the terms and
 conditions of supply and the Regulations
 and provisions of the 2003 Act governing
 such supply. ”Unauthorized use of
 electricity” itself is an expression
 which would, on its plain reading, take
 within its scope all the misuse of the
 electricity or even malpractices adopted
 while using electricity. It is difficult
 to restrict this expression and limit its
 application by the categories stated in
 the explanation. It is indisputable that
 the electricity supply to a consumer is
 restricted and controlled by the terms
 and conditions of supply, the Regulations
 framed and the provisions of the 2003
 Act.”

 14. We also do not find any valid reason for making

 a distinction as made by the High Court in applying

 Section 126 of the Act. From the scheme of the Act,

 it appears that after inspection team notices

 unauthorized use of energy by tampering the meter,

 the authorities can disconnect the power supply

 immediately and make immediate assessment for loss of

 energy, by invoking power under Section 126(1) of the

 Act. The term “unauthorized use of energy” is of

 wide connotation. There may be cases of unauthorized

 use of energy, not amounting to theft, which are

 cases viz. exceeding the sanctioned load or using the

 electricity in the premises where its use is not

 authorized etc. But at the same time, when there is

 an allegation of unauthorized use of energy by

 tampering the meter, such cases of unauthorized use

 of energy include ‘theft’ as defined under Section

 135 of the Act. The power conferred on authorities

 for making assessment under Section 126(1) of the Act

 and power to determine civil liability under Section

 154(5) of the Act, cannot be said to be parallel to

 each other. In this regard, we are of the view that

 the High Court has committed an error in recording a

 finding, that both proceedings cannot operate

 parallelly. In a given case where there is no theft

 of energy, amounting to unauthorized use of energy,

 in such cases no complaint of theft can be lodged as

 contemplated under Section 135 of the Act. In such

 cases for loss of energy, on account of unauthorized

 use of energy not amounting to theft, it is always

 open for the authorities to assess the loss of energy

 by resorting to power under Section 126(1) of the

 Act. In cases where allegation is of unauthorized use

 of energy amounting to theft, in such cases, apart

 from assessing the proceedings under Section 126(1) 

 of the Act, a complaint also can be lodged alleging

 theft of energy as defined under Section 135(1) of

 the Act. In such cases, the Special Court is

 empowered to determine civil liability under Section

 154(5) of the Act. On such determination of civil

 liability by the Special Court, the excess amount, if

 any, deposited by the petitioner, is to be refunded

 to the consumer. It is a settled principle that to

 prove the guilt of the accused in a criminal

 proceeding, authorities have to prove the case beyond

 reasonable doubt and the element of mens rea is also

 to be established. On the other hand, such a strict

 proof is not necessary for assessing the liability

 under Section 126(1) of the Act.
 
 
 15. For the aforesaid reasons, this civil appeal is

 allowed and the judgment and order dated 18.12.2017

 passed by the High Court of Calcutta in F.M.A. No.520

 of 2017 and the corrected order dated 07.02.2018, are

 set aside. No order as to costs.
 
 

 .................... J.
 [R. Banumathi]

 .................... J.
 [R. Subhash Reddy]

 NEW DELHI,
 August 21, 2019
