2023INSC886
 
Civil Appeal Nos. 8527-8529 of 2009 etc. 
 
Page 1 of 55 
 
REPORTABLE 
 
 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 8527-8529 OF 2009 
 
M/S. DAKSHIN GUJARAT VIJ COMPANY 
LIMITED 
.....  
APPELLANT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
VERSUS 
 
 
  
 
M/S. GAYATRI SHAKTI PAPER AND 
BOARD LIMITED AND ANOTHER, ETC. 
 
.....  
 
RESPONDENTS 
 
W I T H 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 1-2 OF 2010 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 1693-1698 OF 2010 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 12282 OF 2016 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1142 OF 2022 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1141 OF 2022 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 4611-4624 OF 2022 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 4532-4556 OF 2022 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4571 OF 2022 
 
CIVIL APPEAL DIARY NO. 10378 OF 2022 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 3662 OF 2022 
 
Digitally signed by
SWETA BALODI
Date: 2023.10.09
18:01:23 IST
Reason:
Signature Not Verified

 
Civil Appeal Nos. 8527-8529 of 2009 etc. 
 
Page 2 of 55 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4233 OF 2022 
 
AND 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 8738 OF 2022 
 
 
 
J U D G M E N T 
 
SANJIV KHANNA, J. 
 
This judgment interprets relevant provisions of the Electricity 
Act, 20031 and Rule 3 of the Electricity Rules, 20052, for being 
classified as a Captive Generating Plant3 and a captive user. 
 
2. 
We will be elucidating the legal position as per the statute, our intent 
being to first lay down the principles of law and then apply the 
principles to the facts and circumstances of each case. 
 
3. 
To decide the legal question, we will refer to two judgments of the 
Appellate Tribunal for Electricity4. These are, Kadodara Power 
Pvt. Ltd. and Others v. Gujarat Electricity Regulatory 
Commission and Another5, dated 22.09.2009, which decision 
was held to be per incuriam on several findings in Tamil Nadu 
 
1 For short, “Act”. 
2 For short, “Rules”. 
3 For short, “CGP”. 
4 For short, “APTEL”. 
5 2009 SCC OnLine APTEL 119; for short, “Kadodara Power”. 

 
Civil Appeal Nos. 8527-8529 of 2009 etc. 
 
Page 3 of 55 
 
Power Producers Association v. Tamil Nadu Electricity 
Regulatory Commission6, dated 07.06.2021. A third decision of 
the APTEL in Sai Wardha Power Generation Limited and Others 
v. Maharashtra Electricity Regulatory Commission7 dated 
26.11.2021, substantially agrees with the view in Tamil Nadu 
Power8 . We shall refer to the reasons given in the decisions and 
the explanation and grounds for our conclusion and legal finding. 
 
4. 
We begin by first reproducing the relevant provisions of the Act9: 
“2. Definition. — In this Act, unless the context 
otherwise requires,—  
 
xx 
xx 
xx 
 
(8) “Captive generating plant” means a power plant set 
up by any person to generate electricity primarily for his 
own use and includes a power plant set up by any 
cooperative society or association of persons for 
generating electricity primarily for use of members of 
such cooperative society or association; 
 
xx 
xx 
xx 
 
(49) “person” shall include any company or body 
corporate or association or body of individuals, whether 
incorporated or not, or artificial juridical person; 
 
xx 
xx 
xx 
 
9. Captive generation. — (1) Notwithstanding 
anything contained in this Act, a person may construct, 
maintain or operate a captive generating plant and 
dedicated transmission lines: 
 
6 2021 SCC OnLine APTEL 19; for short, “Tamil Nadu Power”. 
7 2021 SCC OnLine APTEL 78; for short, “Sai Wardha”. 
8 Supra note 6. 
9 As amended up to 31.08.2023. 

 
Civil Appeal Nos. 8527-8529 of 2009 etc. 
 
Page 4 of 55 
 
Provided that the supply of electricity from the captive 
generating plant through the grid shall be regulated in 
the same manner as the generating station of a 
generating company: 
Provided further that no licence shall be required under 
this Act for supply of electricity generated from a 
captive generating plan to any licensee in accordance 
with the provisions of this Act and the rules and 
regulations made thereunder and to any consumer 
subject to the regulations made under sub-section (2) 
of Section 42. 
(2) Every person, who has constructed a captive 
generating plant and maintains and operates such 
plant, shall have the right to open access for the 
purposes of carrying electricity from his captive 
generating plant to the destination of his use: 
Provided that such open access shall be subject to 
availability of adequate transmission facility and such 
availability of transmission facility shall be determined 
by the Central Transmission Utility or the State 
Transmission Utility, as the case may be: 
Provided further that any dispute regarding the 
availability of transmission facility shall be adjudicated 
upon by the Appropriate Commission." 
 
 
5. 
We would also like to reproduce Rule 3 of the Rules10, interpretation 
of which is pivotal for the decision: 
“3. Requirements of Captive Generating Plant.— 
(1) No power plant shall qualify as a ‘captive generating 
plant’ under Section 9 read with clause (8) of Section 2 
of the Act unless— 
 
(a) in case of a power plant— 
 
(i) not less than twenty-six per cent of the ownership is 
held by the captive user(s); and 
 
 
10 As amended up to 01.09.2023. 

 
Civil Appeal Nos. 8527-8529 of 2009 etc. 
 
Page 5 of 55 
 
(ii) not less than fifty-one per cent of the aggregate 
electricity generated in such plant, determined on an 
annual basis, is consumed for the captive use: 
 
Provided that in case of power plant set up by 
registered 
cooperative 
society, 
the 
conditions 
mentioned under paragraphs at (i) and (ii) above shall 
be satisfied collectively by the members of the co-
operative society: 
 
Provided further that in case of association of persons, 
the captive user(s) shall hold not less than twenty-six 
per cent of the ownership of the plant in aggregate and 
such captive user(s) shall consume not less than fifty-
one per cent of the electricity generated, determined 
on an annual basis, in proportion to their shares in 
ownership of the power plant within a variation not 
exceeding ten per cent; 
 
(b) in case of a generating station owned by a company 
formed as special purpose vehicle for such generating 
station, a unit or units of such generating station 
identified for captive use and not the entire generating 
station satisfy(ies) the conditions contained in 
paragraphs (i) and (ii) of sub-clause (a) above 
including— 
 
Explanation.—(1) The electricity required to be 
consumed by captive users shall be determined with 
reference to such generating unit or units in aggregate 
identified for captive use and not with reference to 
generating station as a whole; and 
 
(2) The equity shares to be held by the captive user(s) 
in the generating station shall not be less than twenty-
six per cent of the proportionate of the equity of the 
company related to the generating unit or units 
identified as the captive generating plant. 
 
Illustration.— In a generating station with two units of 
50 MW each namely Units A and B, one unit of 50 MW 
namely Unit A may be identified as the Captive 
Generating Plant. The captive users shall hold not less 
than thirteen per cent of the equity shares in the 
company (being the twenty-six per cent proportionate 
to Unit A of 50 MW) and not less than fifty-one per cent 

 
Civil Appeal Nos. 8527-8529 of 2009 etc. 
 
Page 6 of 55 
 
of the electricity generated in Unit A determined on an 
annual basis is to be consumed by the captive users. 
 
(2) It shall be the obligation of the captive users to 
ensure that the consumption by the Captive Users at 
the percentages mentioned in sub-clauses (a) and (b) 
of sub-rule (1) above is maintained and in case the 
minimum percentage of captive use is not complied 
with in any year, the entire electricity generated shall 
be treated as if it is a supply of electricity by a 
generating company. 
 
(3) The captive status of such generating plants, where 
captive generating plant and its captive user(s) are 
located in more than one state, shall be verified by the 
Central Electricity Authority as per the procedure 
issued by the Authority with the approval of the Central 
Government. 
 
Explanation.—(1) For the purpose of this rule,— 
 
(a) ‘Annual Basis’ shall be determined based on a 
financial year; 
 
(b) ‘captive user’ shall mean the end user of the 
electricity generated in a Captive Generating Plant and 
the term “captive use” shall be construed accordingly: 
 
Provided that the consumption of electricity by the 
captive user may be either directly or through Energy 
Storage System: 
 
Provided further that the consumption by a subsidiary 
company as defined in clause (87) of Section 2 of the 
Companies Act, 2013 (18 of 2013) or the holding 
company as defined in clause (46) of Section 2 of the 
Companies Act, 2013 (18 of 2013), of a company 
which is a captive user, shall also be admissible as 
captive consumption by the captive user; 
 
(c) ‘Ownership’ in relation to a generating station or 
power plant set up by a company or any other body 
corporate shall mean the equity share capital with 
voting rights. In other cases ownership shall mean 
proprietary interest and control over the generating 
station or power plant; 
 

 
Civil Appeal Nos. 8527-8529 of 2009 etc. 
 
Page 7 of 55 
 
(d) ‘Special Purpose Vehicle’ shall mean a legal entity 
owning, operating and maintaining a generating station 
and with no other business or activity to be engaged in 
by the legal entity.” 
 
6. 
Section 2(8) of the Act defines a “captive generating plant” as a 
power plant set up by any person to generate electricity primarily 
for his own use. A power plant set up by co-operative society or 
associations of persons for generating electricity primarily for use 
of the members of the co-operative society or association is also a 
CGP.  
 
7. 
Section 2(8) emphasises on the words, “primarily for his own use” 
and “primarily for use of the members of the co-operative society or 
association of persons”. Secondly, while specifically referring to a 
co-operative society and association of persons, the clause does 
not refer to a company. Section 2(49) defines the word, “person”, to 
include any company or body corporate or association or body of 
individuals, whether incorporated or not, or artificial juridical person. 
 
8. 
On a conjoint reading of Section 2(8) and Section 2(49) of the Act, 
a CGP can be an individual, body corporate, association or body of 
individuals, whether incorporated or not, “primarily for his own use” 
and “primarily for use of the members of the co-operative society or 
association of persons”. An association of body corporates is 
permitted to set up a CGP. 

 
Civil Appeal Nos. 8527-8529 of 2009 etc. 
 
Page 8 of 55 
 
 
9. 
Section 9 of the Act, a specific provision relating to captive 
generation, applies notwithstanding anything contained in any other 
provision of the Act. It states that any person may construct, 
maintain or operate a CGP and dedicated transmission lines. The 
second proviso to Section 9(1) states that no licence is required 
under the Act for supply of electricity generated from a CGP to any 
licensee in accordance with the provisions of the Act, rules and 
regulations made thereunder. However, supply to any consumer is 
subject to regulations made under Section 42(2) of the Act. The first 
proviso to Section 9 states that the supply of electricity from the 
CGP through the grid shall be regulated in the same manner as the 
generating station of a generating company. 
 
10. 
Section 9(2) of the Act states that a person who has constructed a 
CGP and maintains and operates the CGP, shall have right to open 
access for the purpose of carrying electricity from his CGP to the 
destination of his use. The first proviso to Section 9(2) states that 
such open access shall be subject to the availability of adequate 
transmission facility and such availability of transmission facility 
shall be determined by the Central Transmission Utility or the State 
Transmission Utility, as the case may be. Any dispute regarding 

 
Civil Appeal Nos. 8527-8529 of 2009 etc. 
 
Page 9 of 55 
 
availability of transmission facility is to be adjudicated by the 
appropriate commission. 
 
11. 
Therefore, in terms of Section 9(2) of the Act, a person who has 
constructed a CGP, and maintains and operates such plant,11 
subject to availability constraints, can ask the distribution licensee 
to open access for the purpose of carrying electricity from his CGP 
to the destination of his use. This right under Section 9(2) to open 
access to the transmission facilities, must be contrasted with the 
right referred to in Section 9(1), which states that any person may 
construct, maintain or operate a CGP and use dedicated 
transmission lines for self-use. 
 
12. 
The third aspect to be noticed with reference to Section 9(1) is that 
the second proviso permits a person who has constructed, 
maintains or operates a CGP, to supply electricity generated from 
a CGP to any licensee. However, as stated above, this supply is 
subject to the provisions of the Act, and rules and regulations made 
thereunder. Thus, the supply to any consumer, other than a captive 
user, is subject to regulations made under Section 42(2) of the Act. 
 
11 As explained and elucidated below the word ‘and’ in Section 9(2) of the Act, when read harmoniously 
with Section 9(1) and on purposive interpretation would include a subsequent owner who maintains 
and operates a CGP. Captive generation as per Section 9 is not restricted to a person who constructs, 
maintains and operates a CGP. The provision does not bar or prohibit transfer of ownership rights by 
the person who has constructed or had originally set up the CGP.     

 
Civil Appeal Nos. 8527-8529 of 2009 etc. 
 
Page 10 of 55 
 
Equally, the first proviso permits supply of electricity from the CGP 
through the grid, in which case the supply is to be regulated in the 
same manner as in generating station of a generating company.  
 
13. 
Section 9 read with the relevant provisions of the Act, therefore, 
postulates three situations. First, when the person who constructs, 
maintains or operates a CGP for their own use and supplies 
electricity to himself through dedicated transmission lines. 
Secondly, when the person who constructs, maintains or operates 
a CGP to supply electricity by exercising their right to open access 
for the purpose of carrying electricity from their CGP to the 
destination of their use. Thirdly, when the electricity generated from 
the CGP is supplied through the grid for any licensee or consumer. 
While no license is required for the supply of electricity to a licensee 
or consumer, the supply is subject to the regulations made under 
Section 42(2) of the Act.  
 
14. 
Section 42(1) of the Act states that a distribution licensee has the 
duty to develop and maintain an efficient, coordinated, and 
economical distribution system in the area of his supply.12 A 
distribution licensee also owes duty to supply electricity in 
 
12 “Section 42. (Duties of distribution licensee and open access): --- (1) It shall be the duty of a 
distribution licensee to develop and maintain an efficient, co-ordinated and economical distribution 
system in his area of supply and to supply electricity in accordance with the provisions contained in 
this Act.” 

 
Civil Appeal Nos. 8527-8529 of 2009 etc. 
 
Page 11 of 55 
 
accordance with the provisions of the Act. Section 42(2) states that 
open access shall be introduced by a State Commission in such 
phases, and subject to such conditions, including cross subsidies 
and other operational constraints.13 The sub-section permits the 
State Commission to specify the extent of open access in 
successive phases and determine charges for wheeling, which 
charges have to be determined having regard to all relevant factors, 
including cross subsidies and other operational constraints.14 The 
first proviso states that open access shall be allowed on payment 
of surcharge in addition to charges for wheeling as determined by 
the State Commission.15 Such surcharge, in terms of the second 
proviso, is to be utilised to meet the requirements of current level of 
cross subsidy within the area of supply of the distributing licensee.16 
The third proviso provides that cross subsidy and surcharge shall 
be progressively reduced in the manner as may be specified by the 
 
13 “42(2) The State Commission shall introduce open access in such phases and subject to such 
conditions, (including the cross subsidies, and other operational constraints) as may be specified within 
one year of the appointed date by it and in specifying the extent of open access in successive phases 
and in determining the charges for wheeling, it shall have due regard to all relevant factors including 
such cross-subsidies, and other operational constraints:” 
14 Supra note 11. 
15 “Section 42. (Duties of distribution licensee and open access): --- 
xx 
xx 
xx 
Provided that 12[such open access shall be allowed on payment of a surcharge] in addition to the 
charges for wheeling as may be determined by the State Commission:” 
16 “Section 42. (Duties of distribution licensee and open access): ---  
xx 
xx 
xx 
Provided further that such surcharge shall be utilised to meet the requirements of current level of cross-
subsidy within the area of supply of the distribution licensee:” 

 
Civil Appeal Nos. 8527-8529 of 2009 etc. 
 
Page 12 of 55 
 
State Commission.17 What is important for our consideration is the 
fourth proviso which states that surcharge will not be leviable in 
case open access is provided to a person who has established a 
CGP for carrying electricity to the destination of his use. The fourth 
proviso reads: 
“42. Duties of distribution licensee and open 
access. —  
 
xx 
xx 
xx 
 
Provided also that such surcharge shall not be leviable 
in case open access is provided to a person who has 
established a captive generating plant for carrying the 
electricity to the destination of his own use:” 
 
In our opinion, the fourth proviso deals with the second situation 
elaborated by us above, that is, when the person who has 
established a CGP, invokes his right to open access for the purpose 
of carrying electricity from the CGP to the destination of his own use 
in terms of Section 9(2) of the Act. In such cases, no surcharge is 
leviable even if the right to open access is invoked. However, 
wheeling charges have to be paid to the distribution licensee for the 
use of his distribution system to supply electricity to the destination 
of his own use. 
 
 
17 “Section 42. (Duties of distribution licensee and open access): ---  
xx 
xx 
xx 
“Provided also that such surcharge and cross-subsidies shall be progressively reduced in the manner 
as may be specified by the State Commission:” 

 
Civil Appeal Nos. 8527-8529 of 2009 etc. 
 
Page 13 of 55 
 
15. 
The aforesaid interpretation of Section 9 and Section 42 of the Act, 
respectfully follows the view expressed by this Court in 
Chhattisgarh State Power Distribution Company Limited v. 
Chhattisgarh State Electricity Regulatory Commission and 
Anr.18 and Maharashtra State Electricity Distribution Company 
Limited v. JSW Steel Limited and Ors.19 
 
16. 
In Maharashtra State Electricity20, the specific question answered 
was whether captive consumers are liable to pay additional 
surcharge leviable under the Act. The answer in the negative, holds 
that levy of additional surcharge would be contrary to Section 42(2) 
of the Act read with the definition of “consumer” vide Section 2(15) 
of the Act21, which means a person who is supplied with electricity 
by the licensee or the government or any other person engaged in 
the business of supplying electricity to the public and includes a 
person whose premises for the time being are connected for the 
purpose of receiving electricity with the works of a licensee, 
government, or such other person, as the case may be. Apart from 
 
18 (2022) SCC Online SC 604; for short, “Chhattisgarh State Power”. 
19 (2022) 2 SCC 742; for short, “Maharashtra State Electricity”. 
20 Supra note 19. 
21 2. Definition.—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—  
xx 
xx 
xx 
(15) ‘consumer’ means any person who is supplied with electricity for his own use by a licensee or the 
Government or by any other person engaged in the business of supplying electricity to the public under 
this Act or any other law for the time being in force and includes any person whose premises are for 
the time being connected for the purpose of receiving electricity with the works of a licensee, the 
Government or such other person, as the case may be;” 

 
Civil Appeal Nos. 8527-8529 of 2009 etc. 
 
Page 14 of 55 
 
the language of the sections, this Court highlighted that the captive 
consumers incur huge expenditure or invest substantial amounts 
for the purpose of construction, maintenance and operation of the 
CGP and sometimes on the dedicated transmission lines. Thus, 
captive consumers form a separate class different viz the, 
“consumers”, defined under Section 2(15).22 They are not be 
subjected and liable to pay the additional surcharge. 
 
17. 
In Chhattisgarh State Power23, reference was made to the 
National Electricity Policy, 2005,24 notified by the Government of 
India in exercise of its powers under Section 3 of the Act on 
12.02.2005. Clauses 5.2.24 to 5.2.26 of the Policy dealing with 
captive generation and use are relevant, and read:  
“Captive Generation 
5.2.24 The liberal provision in the Electricity Act, 2003 
with respect to setting up of captive power plant has 
been made with a view to not only securing reliable, 
quality and cost effective power but also to facilitate 
creation of employment opportunities through speedy 
and efficient growth of industry. 
5.2.25 The provision relating to captive power plants to 
be set up by group of consumers is primarily aimed at 
enabling small and medium industries or other 
consumers that may not individually be in a position to 
set up plant of optimal size in a cost effective manner. 
It needs to be noted that efficient expansion of small 
and medium industries across the country would lead 
to creation of enormous employment opportunities. 
 
22 Supra note 21. 
23 Supra note 18. 
24 For short, “Policy”. 

 
Civil Appeal Nos. 8527-8529 of 2009 etc. 
 
Page 15 of 55 
 
5.2.26 A large number of captive and standby 
generating stations in India have surplus capacity that 
could be supplied to the grid continuously or during 
certain time periods. These plants offer a sizeable and 
potentially 
competitive 
capacity 
that 
could 
be 
harnessed for meeting demand for power. Under the 
Act, captive generators have access to licensees and 
would get access to consumers who are allowed open 
access. Grid inter-connections for captive generators 
shall be facilitated as per section 30 of the Act. This 
should be done on priority basis to enable captive 
generation to become available as distributed 
generation along the grid. Towards this end, non-
conventional energy sources including co-generation 
could also play a role. Appropriate commercial 
arrangements would need to be instituted between 
licensees and the captive generators for harnessing of 
spare capacity energy from captive power plants. The 
appropriate Regulatory Commission shall exercise 
regulatory 
oversight 
on 
such 
commercial 
arrangements 
between 
captive 
generators 
and 
licensees and determine tariffs when a licensee is the 
off-taker of power from captive plant.” 
 
18. 
This Court in Chhattisgarh State Power25 observes that the 
provisions of the Act which deal with captive generation and use 
have been made not only with the view to secure reliable, quality 
and cost-effective power, but also to felicitate creation of 
employment opportunities through speedy and efficient growth of 
industry. The policy states that provisions relating to the CGP, 
which can be set up by a group of consumers, are primarily made 
for enabling small and medium industries and other consumers, 
who may not be individually be in a position to set up a power plant 
 
25 Supra note 18. 

 
Civil Appeal Nos. 8527-8529 of 2009 etc. 
 
Page 16 of 55 
 
of optimum size, in a cost-effective manner. Efficient expansion and 
growth of small and medium industries across the country leads to 
creation of employment opportunities. Lastly, the captive and 
standby generating stations in India can supply electricity 
continuously or during certain time periods. The policy which is 
issued under Section 3 of the Act, contains the statutory flavour. In 
case of ambiguity, an interpretation which advances the object and 
purpose of the Act as underlined and stated in the policy has to be 
preferred. 
 
19. 
At this stage, we must distinguish an earlier decision of this Court 
in SESA Sterilite Limited v. Orissa Electricity Regulatory 
Commission and Others.26 In this case the appellant industry had 
set up a unit in Special Economic Zone27, and was the developer of 
the SEZ.  The appellant-industry had entered into a power purchase 
agreement with a third party. The contention raised by the appellant 
industry was that it was not drawing or utilising any electricity from 
the distribution licensee and, therefore, is not a consumer of the 
distribution licensee, and accordingly not liable to pay the cross-
subsidy surcharge. This was not a case of a captive user. The 
contention of the appellant-industry was rejected by this Court 
 
26 (2014) 8 SCC 444; for short, “SESA Sterlite”. 
27 For short, “SEZ”. 

 
Civil Appeal Nos. 8527-8529 of 2009 etc. 
 
Page 17 of 55 
 
referring to the rationale behind cross-subsidy surcharge. Bulk 
consumers who avail of open access are burdened with relatively 
high rates, as this subsidises supply of electricity to marginalised 
and vulnerable sections of the society. Thus, the exit of consumers 
has an adverse effect on finances of the existing distribution 
licensee. Cross subsidy surcharge intends to compensate the 
existing distribution licensee in a two-fold manner: first, to 
compensate on the requirements of current levels of cross-subsidy, 
and secondly, to compensate for the fixed cost incurred by the 
distribution licensee as a part of its obligation to supply electricity to 
a consumer on demand, sometimes referred to as the stranded 
cost. Cross subsidy and surcharge are meant to compensate the 
distribution licensee on both counts.  Thus, this decision does not 
deal with and decide the legal issue in question before us which 
relates to the definition of the CGP and use of electricity by the 
captive users.  
 
20. 
In addition to the reasons given in Chhattisgarh State Power28 and 
Maharashtra State Electricity29, we will also like to refer to Section 
38 of the Act30, which prescribes that the Central Government may 
 
28 Supra note 18. 
29 Supra note 19. 
30 “38. Central Transmission Utility and functions.—(1) The Central Government may notify an 
Government company as the Central Transmission Utility: 

 
Civil Appeal Nos. 8527-8529 of 2009 etc. 
 
Page 18 of 55 
 
notify any Government company as the Central Transmission 
Utility31. The CTU cannot engage in business of generating and 
trading of electricity. Its functions under Section 38(2) includes the 
planning and coordination relating to inter-State transmission 
system and the development of efficient, coordinated and 
economical system of inter-State transmission lines for smooth flow 
of electricity from generating stations to the load centre and to 
 
Provided that the Central Transmission Utility shall not engage in the business of generation of 
electricity or trading in electricity: 
Provided further that the Central Government may transfer, and vest any property, interest in property, 
rights and liabilities connected with, and personnel involved in transmission of electricity of such Central 
Transmission Utility, to a company or companies to be incorporated under the Companies Act, 1956 
(1 of 1956) to function as a transmission licensee, through a transfer scheme to be effected in the 
manner specified under Part XIII and such company or companies shall be deemed to be transmission 
licensees under this Act. 
(2) The functions of the Central Transmission Utility shall be— 
(a) to undertake transmission of electricity through inter-State transmission system; 
(b) to discharge all functions of planning and co-ordination relating to inter-State transmission system 
with— 
(i) State Transmission Utilities; 
(ii) Central Government; 
(iii) State Governments; 
(iv) generating companies; 
(v) Regional Power Committees; 
(vi) Authority; 
(vii) licensees; 
(viii) any other person notified by the Central Government in this behalf; 
(c) to ensure development of an efficient, co-ordinated and economical system of inter-State 
transmission lines for smooth flow of electricity from generating stations to the load centres; 
(d) to provide non-discriminatory open access to its transmission system for use by— 
(i) any licensee or generating company on payment of the transmission charges; or 
(ii) any consumer as and when such open access is provided by the State Commission under sub-
section (2) of Section 42, on payment of the transmission charges and a surcharge thereon, as may 
be specified by the Central Commission: 
Provided that such surcharge shall be utilised for the purpose of meeting the requirement of current 
level cross-subsidy: 
Provided further that such surcharge and cross subsidies shall be progressively reduced in the manner 
as may be specified by the Central Commission: 
Provided also that the manner of payment and utilisation of the surcharge shall be specified by the 
Central Commission: 
Provided also that such surcharge shall not be leviable in case open access is provided to a person 
who has established a captive generating plant for carrying the electricity to the destination of his own 
use.” 
31 For short, “CTU”. 

 
Civil Appeal Nos. 8527-8529 of 2009 etc. 
 
Page 19 of 55 
 
provide non-discriminatory open access to its transmission system 
for use by a licensee or generating company on payment of 
transmission charges and by any consumer as and when open 
access is provided by the State Commission under Section 42(2), 
on payment of transmission charges or surcharge thereon. The 
fourth proviso to  Section 38(2) reads: 
“38. Central Transmission Utility and functions. — 
 
xx 
xx 
xx 
 
Provided also that such surcharge shall not be leviable 
in case open access is provided to a person who has 
established a captive generating plant for carrying the 
electricity to the destination of his own use.” 
 
Thus, the Act prohibits levy of surcharge, cross or additional 
surcharge, even when open access is provided to a person who 
has established a CGP for carrying the electricity to the destination 
of their own use.  
 
21. 
This brings us to the core issue which relates to interpretation of 
Rule 3 of the Rules. Three issues arise for our specific 
consideration in view of the conflicting judgments of the APTEL. 
These are: 
I. 
Eligibility criteria for a CGP/captive user under Rule 3(1)(a) of 
the Rules.  

 
Civil Appeal Nos. 8527-8529 of 2009 etc. 
 
Page 20 of 55 
 
II. 
Interpretation of the second proviso under Rule 3(1)(a) of the 
Rules and in particular the words “association of persons”. 
III. 
Whether a company set up as a Special Purpose Vehicle32 for 
generating electricity is an, “association of persons”, in terms 
of the second proviso to Rule 3(1)(a) of the Rules.  
 
Issue I 
Eligibility criteria for a CGP/captive user specified under 
Rule 3(1)(a) of the Rules.  
 
22. 
Rule 3(1)(a) of the Rules was interpreted by this Court in 
Chhattisgarh State Power33.  In the said case, M/s. Shri Bajrang 
Power and Ispat Ltd.34 had established a CGP. SBPIL had 
submitted a petition to provide open access for wheeling of power 
through the transmission system of Chhattisgarh State Power35, 
for the captive use by SBPIL’s sister concern, Shri Bajrang Metallics 
and Power Limited36. SBMPL held 27.6% equity shares in SBPIL. 
However, the judgement also states that SBMPL directly held 
26.67% shares in the CGP.37  The petition was resisted by CSPDCL 
on the ground that the consumption of electricity by SBPIL and 
 
32 For short, “SPV”. 
33 Supra note 18. 
34 For short, “SBIPL”. 
35 For short, CSPDCL. 
36 For short, “SBMPL”. 
37 The judgment states that, “It was contended by the appellant that SBPIL holds more than 72% of the 
shares of the company. However, its consumption would be limited only to 14.16% (13.22 MU), 
whereas the consumption of SBMPL holding 26.67% shares, would be 57.87%(54 MU). It was 
submitted that this was not proportionate to the ownership of the power plant”. Proviso to Explanation 
1 to Rule 3 states that consumption by a holding or subsidiary of a company, which is a captive user, 
shall also be admissible as captive consumption. 

 
Civil Appeal Nos. 8527-8529 of 2009 etc. 
 
Page 21 of 55 
 
SBMPL independently/individually was not in proportion to their 
respective ownership of the CGP. SBPIL, while holding 72% shares 
in the CGP, was to consume 14.16% of the electricity generated, 
whereas, SBMPL, which was holding 26.67% shares in the CGP, 
was to consume 57.87% of the electricity generated.  
 
23. 
This Court did not agree with the plea and contention of the 
distribution licensee. The plant was held to be a CGP and SBMPL 
a captive user. The requirement under Rule 3(1)(a) of the Rules is 
twofold. First, the captive user should not hold less than 26% of the 
ownership in the CGP. Secondly, the captive user should consume 
not less than 51% of the aggregate electricity generated by such 
CGP. The second proviso to Rule 3(1)(a)(ii) of the Rules states that 
in case of an association of persons, the captive user(s) shall not 
hold less than 26% of ownership of the plant in aggregate and the 
captive user(s) shall not consume less than 51% of the electricity 
generated, determined on an annual basis, in proportion to their 
shares in ownership of the CGP within a variation not exceeding 
+10%. The decision holds that an association of corporate bodies 
can establish a power plant. SBMPL held 27.6% equity shares in 
SBPIL and thus satisfied the ownership requirement of 26%. The 
second requirement with regard to consumption of electricity was 

 
Civil Appeal Nos. 8527-8529 of 2009 etc. 
 
Page 22 of 55 
 
satisfied as SBMPL and SBPIL, together, would be consuming 
more than 51% of the power generated.38 
 
24. 
The ratio in the Chhattisgarh State Power39 requires clarification 
and elaboration. We have provided such clarification and 
elaboration in Issues I and II, on our interpretation of the rule of 
proportionality in terms of the second proviso to Rule 3(1)(a) of the 
Rules.  
 
25. 
To qualify as a CGP under Section 9, read with Section 2(8) of the 
Act, the requirements of paragraphs (i) and (ii) to Rule 3(1)(a) of the 
Rules have to be satisfied. We have already referred to the 
definition of a CGP under Section 2(8) of the Act which uses the 
words, “primarily for his own use”. This expression has been given 
statutory grail vide Rule 3 of the Rules. Rule 3 as repeatedly noticed 
incorporates two separate requirements. The first requirement is 
that the captive user(s) should have not less than 26% of the 
ownership in the CGP. Lower limit or minimum of 26% ownership 
is prescribed. Upper limit of ownership is not prescribed. The 
second requirement relates to the minimum electricity consumption. 
51% of aggregated or more of the generated electricity should be 
consumed by the user(s) who meets the ownership requirement. 
 
38 See footnote 37. 
39 Supra note 18. 

 
Civil Appeal Nos. 8527-8529 of 2009 etc. 
 
Page 23 of 55 
 
 
26. 
The presence of the words, “not less than”, in paragraphs (i) and (ii) 
to Rule 3(1)(a) of the Rules reflects and shows that the stipulations 
with regard to 26% ownership and 51% consumption is the minimal 
or lowest threshold.  Maximum is not prescribed. A captive user 
who owns 100% of the CGP and consumes 51% or more electricity 
generated from such plant would satisfy the parameters prescribed. 
Equally, a captive user who owns 26% of the CGP and consumes 
51% or more of the electricity generated would qualify as a captive 
user. However, this can result in abuse or gaming where there are 
multiple owners with different shareholdings. In case of an 
association of persons, a situation which is covered by the first 
explanation. This aspect, when there are multiple owners, in a case 
of association of persons, is examined under Issue II. 
 
27. 
Proviso to clause (b) to Explanation 1 to Rule 3 states that 
consumption by a subsidiary, or holding company as defined in the 
Companies Act, 2013, when one of them is a captive user, shall be 
also admissible as captive consumption by the captive user. Clause 
(b) to Explanation 1 to Rule 3 states that captive user is the end 
user of the electricity. Captive user is the actual consumer who uses 
electricity for his own use. 
 

 
Civil Appeal Nos. 8527-8529 of 2009 etc. 
 
Page 24 of 55 
 
28. 
The first proviso to Rule 3(1)(a) of the Rules applies in case of a 
CGP set up by a registered cooperative society. In such cases, the 
requirements under paragraphs (i) and (ii) to Rule 3(1)(a) are 
treated as satisfied collectively by the members of the cooperative 
society. Therefore, if the members of the cooperative society 
consume more than 51% of the electricity generated collectively, 
the power plant is to be treated as a CGP and the members of the 
cooperative society as captive users. The cooperative society may 
supply 49% or less of the aggregate electricity generated to third 
parties. Any third party, who is not a member of the cooperative 
society, will be a non-captive user and a consumer, who will be 
liable to pay a cross-subsidy and an additional surcharge, as 
applicable. The members of the cooperative society when they 
collectively satisfy the consumption requirement will not be liable to 
pay cross-subsidy or additional surcharge, irrespective of whether 
they use dedicated transmission lines or exercise their right to open 
access using the distribution network of the distribution licensee. 
They will be liable to pay wheeling charges to the distribution 
licensee in case they use their distribution network. 
 
29. 
The second proviso to Rule 3(1)(a) of the Rules applies in cases 
where the captive user(s) is an, “association of persons”. We will 
elaborate on the eligibility requirements for, “association of 

 
Civil Appeal Nos. 8527-8529 of 2009 etc. 
 
Page 25 of 55 
 
persons”, while interpreting the second proviso to Rule 3(1)(a) in 
Issue II.  
 
30. 
Two secondary, but nevertheless important questions arise for our 
consideration.  
 
31. 
First, a contention was raised before us that since Section 2(8) of 
the Act uses the expression, “power plant set up by any person”, 
the captive user under Rule 3(1)(a) of the Rules must be the person 
who had participated in setting up the plant. It is submitted that, “set 
up”, does not include the acquisition of shares/ownership after the 
power plant has already been set up. Therefore, transfer of captive 
status through transfer of ownership is prohibited under the Act.  
 
32. 
We should not accept this plea for several reasons. The expression, 
“set up” used in clause Section 2(8) of the Act should not to be read 
in a pedantic manner as referring to initial set up. We should 
recognise the practical reality and not ignore the impractical asinine 
consequences of this interpretation. Section 2(8) of the Act should 
not be read as impliedly incorporating a prohibition to transfer of 
ownership once the CGP has been set up. This bar is not 
specifically stated and mentioned, though the legislature could have 
stated this in simple words. Rather, in Section 9(1) the words used 
are, “construct, maintain or operate a captive generating plant”. 

 
Civil Appeal Nos. 8527-8529 of 2009 etc. 
 
Page 26 of 55 
 
Thus, construction, maintenance or operation of a CGP under 
Section 9(1) of the Act can be read disjunctively. This emanates 
from the use of the word, “or”, with reference to “construct, maintain 
or operate” in Section 9(1). This would be rational and reasonable 
interpretation in consonance with the legislative intent. It is not 
necessary that the person who maintains and operates the CGP 
must have also constructed the CGP. Construction, maintenance 
or operation can be by different persons. This is brought out in Rule 
3 of the Rules which specifies the eligibility criteria for captive users. 
Rule 3 refers to the percentage of ownership of the captive user in 
the CGP, and use/consumption by the captive user in the financial 
year. 
 
33. 
Clause (c) to Explanation 1 to Rule 3 states that ownership in 
relation to the generating station or power plant set up by a 
company or body corporate means the equity capital with voting 
rights. In other cases, ownership means proprietary interest and 
control over the generating station or power plant. 
 
34. 
Section 9(2) the words used are “every person, who has 
constructed a captive generating plant and maintains and operates 
such plant”. The expression, “every person” can refer to a person 
who maintains and operates a CGP while not having constructed 

 
Civil Appeal Nos. 8527-8529 of 2009 etc. 
 
Page 27 of 55 
 
the CGP, which meaning and interpretation gains affirmation from 
the language of Section 9(1) which states that a, “a person may 
construct, maintain or operate a captive generating plant”. In case 
of ambiguity, it is useful to apply the purpose and object rule of 
interpretation. A practical interpretation is preferable, so as not to 
over-ride the legislative intent. It is legitimate for the court to assume 
that the legislature knows the reality and supports and enacts 
practicable laws which encourages and promotes business 
activities. 
 
35. 
The expression, “person”, as defined under Section 2(49) of the 
Act, includes, inter alia, body corporates and association or body of 
individuals, whether incorporated or not. Transfer of ownership in 
case of companies and association of persons is a normal 
occurrence and incidence of business.  
 
36. 
This issue was examined in Kadodara Power40 and it has been 
observed: 
“Can the ownership of the CGP be transferred after its 
set up?: 
 
xx 
xx 
xx 
 
21. It is submitted that the words "set up" here are 
important and that the person who has set up the plant 
alone can own captive generating plant and not the 
person(s) who is transferee from the original owner(s). 
 
40 Supra note 5. 

 
Civil Appeal Nos. 8527-8529 of 2009 etc. 
 
Page 28 of 55 
 
This proposition has not been accepted by the 
Commission in the impugned order. Nor does this 
proposition appeal to us. The Act nowhere prescribes 
that once set up by a person(s) a captive generating 
plant cannot be transferred to another owner. Nor does 
the Act say that on transfer of ownership the captive 
generating plant will lose its character of being captive 
despite fulfillment of all other conditions requiring it to 
be so. Section 9 of the Act which permits captive 
generation 
begins 
with 
the 
following 
words: 
notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the 
person may construct, maintain or operate a captive 
generating plant and dedicated transmission lines". 
Obviously the owner of a captive generating plant need 
not be one who constructs. Set up defined in section 
2(8) has been made equal to "construct, maintain or 
operate'' by the use of these words in section 9. As we 
view it a captive generating plant does not lose its 
character by transfer of the ownership or any part of 
the ownership provided the generating plant produces 
power primarily for the use of its owner(s). The 
Regulation quoted above lays down further restrictions 
on the user of the power generated by a CGP. If all the 
provisions of the Act and Regulations governing 
captive generation and consumption from the CGP are 
specified a plant will be a CGP notwithstanding the fact 
that the plant at present is not owned by the person 
who originally set up the plant.” 
 
 
We agree with the said interpretation and logic. A CGP does 
not lose its captive status due to transfer of its ownership or any 
part of its ownership, provided that the transferee, that is, a new 
captive user, complies with eligibility criteria specified under Rule 3 
of the Rules. 
 
37. 
This Court in Global Energy Ltd. and Another v. Central 
Electricity Regulatory Commission41, while holding that 
 
41 (2009) 15 SCC 570.  

 
Civil Appeal Nos. 8527-8529 of 2009 etc. 
 
Page 29 of 55 
 
Regulation 6-A of the Central Electricity Regulatory Commission 
(Procedure, Terms and Conditions for Grant of Trading Licence and 
Other Related Matters), Regulations, 2004 was intra vires the Act 
and the Constitution of India, had reasoned: 
“38. When a disqualification is provided, it is to operate 
at the threshold in respect of the players in the field of 
trading in electricity. When, however, a regulatory 
statute is sought to be enforced, the power of the 
authority to impose restrictions and conditions must be 
construed having regard to the purpose and object it 
seeks to achieve. Dealing in any manner with 
generation, distribution and supply and trading in 
electrical energy is vital for the economy of the country. 
The private players who are permitted or who are 
granted licence in this behalf may have to satisfy the 
conditions imposed. No doubt, such conditions must be 
reasonable. Concededly, the doctrine of proportionality 
may have to be invoked.” 
  
Dealing with the generation of electricity being vital for the economy 
of the country, a narrow interpretation will ignore realities, leading 
to irrational results. Section 2(8) and Section 9(2) are required to be 
read harmoniously with Section 9(1) of the Act. A purposive 
interpretation would include a subsequent owner of the CGP, who 
is an owner as per clause (c) to Explanation 1 to Rule 3 of the Rules. 
 
38. 
In Tamil Nadu Power42, the APTEL had held that the minimum 
ownership and consumption criteria for captive users are required 
to be satisfied only on the last day of the financial year, that is, 31st 
 
42 Supra note 6. 

 
Civil Appeal Nos. 8527-8529 of 2009 etc. 
 
Page 30 of 55 
 
March. This, the APTEL in Tamil Nadu Power43 observes, will 
account for any change in shareholding of the CGP, and 
consequent captive status, throughout the financial year. It is 
observed: 
“292. It is critical for us to note the practical difficulties 
staring down at the face of the captive users and CGPs 
in the event the concept of weighted average is applied. 
We agree with the submissions of the Appellant that the 
nature of shareholding in a captive structure is fluid and 
dynamic. That, existing captive users within the said 
captive structure can choose to give-up its ownership 
along with consumption of captive power at any point of 
time if it considers no usage for the same. In such a 
scenario, if no new captive user(s) is added then the 
shareholding along with consumption is accordingly 
adjusted. A CGP cannot foresee the future and predict 
as to how many of its shareholders may give up their 
ownership along with consumption of captive power, 
neither can it be predicted, if any new/ how many 
captive user(s) will be inducted within the structure. In 
such a scenario, if in terms of Rule 3 of the Rules 
verification of minimum shareholding along with 
minimum consumption is not done annually, at the end 
of the financial year but done considering ownership at 
different periods during the year, then same would 
create unforeseen difficulties for a CGP to maintain its 
captive structure. As such, we opine that the verification 
mandated under the Rule 3 has to be done annually, by 
considering the shareholding existing at the end of the 
financial year. This is also evident from a perusal of 
Format-5 formulated by TNERC as a part of the 
impugned order, which also specifically contemplates 
verification to be done as per the shareholding existing 
at the end of the financial year. Similar view has already 
been taken by us in Appeal No. 02 and 179 of 2018 
titled as “Prism Cement Limited v. MPERC & Ors” 
(supra).  
 
xx 
xx 
xx 
 
 
 
43 Supra note 6. 

 
Civil Appeal Nos. 8527-8529 of 2009 etc. 
 
Page 31 of 55 
 
294. In light of our findings, we also observe that 
suppose there are ten (10) captive users who avail open 
access for captive use under Section 9 of the Act at the 
start of the financial year, and in the event three (3) of 
such captive users stops sourcing captive power after 
six months, and instead three new captive users are 
introduced within the captive structure by subscribing 
equity shareholding with voting rights immediately 
thereafter, then when the verification of captive status 
will be done annually on the basis of the shareholding 
existing at the end of such financial year, in that case 
the total number of captive users throughout the 
financial year would be treated as thirteen (7+3+3) and 
not 10. This is because the shareholding of the three 
captive users who stopped sourcing captive power, 
cannot have a zero/nil shareholding, as they sourced 
captive power for the first six months. While verifying 
the condition under Rule 3(1)(a)(i) and (ii) of the Rules, 
the consumption of captive power has to be done by 
captive users holding a minimum of 26% shareholding. 
Therefore, in the event shareholding of a captive user 
is considered as zero/nil after a few months into the 
financial year, then such user cannot be permitted to 
take benefit of availing captive power thereby seeking 
exemption from payment of CSS. In any event, the 
applicability of CSS will also depend upon the 
observations made by us in Appeal No. 38 of 2013 titled 
as ‘M/s. Steel Furnace Association of India v. PSERC & 
Anr.’”  
 
39. 
We do not agree. The minimum threshold of ownership, which is 
26%, is to be met and satisfied throughout the year and not at the 
end of the financial year alone. The reasoning in Tamil Nadu 
Power44 ignores that there is a connect between paragraph (i) and 
(ii) of Rule 3(1)(a) of the Rules. Paragraph (ii) which refers to 
minimum electricity that is required to be consumed by captive 
users is with reference to the minimum ownership specified in 
 
44 Supra note 6. 

 
Civil Appeal Nos. 8527-8529 of 2009 etc. 
 
Page 32 of 55 
 
paragraph (i) of the said Rule. Thus, the minimum ownership 
requirement is required to be maintained continuously, throughout 
the financial year, that is, from 1st April of a year to 31st March of the 
next year, along with the minimum electricity consumption 
requirement. This is also the mandate of Explanation (2) to Rule 
3(1)(b) of the Rules, which casts obligation on the captive users to 
ensure compliance of clauses (a) and (b) to sub-rule (1) to Rule 3 
of the Rules. 
 
40. 
The issue of computation of consumption of electricity and change 
of shareholding of captive users, when a CGP has more than one 
captive user and the application of the proportionality principle in 
terms of second proviso to Rule 3(1)(a) has been dealt by us in 
Issue II.  
 
Issue II 
Application of the second proviso to Rule 3(1)(a) of the 
Rules. 
 
41. 
The second proviso provides an additional eligibility requirement 
where the captive users are “an association of persons”. At the 
outset, we must record that the proviso is ambiguous and 
confusing. It states that in case of association of persons being the 
captive user(s), the captive user(s) shall hold not less than 26% of 
the ownership of the plant in aggregate and such captive user(s) 
shall not consume less than 51% of the electricity generated on an 

 
Civil Appeal Nos. 8527-8529 of 2009 etc. 
 
Page 33 of 55 
 
annual basis. To this extent, it is an exact replica of paragraphs (i) 
and (ii) of Rule 3(1)(a). Thereafter, the suffix in the last portion, 
states that the proportion of the shares held by the captive user(s) 
must be in proportion to the consumption of electricity generated 
within a variation not exceeding 10 percent.  
 
42. 
In Kadodara Power45, referring to proportionality requirement, it is  
held: 
“How proportionality of consumption has to be 
assessed:  
17. The Electricity Rules 2005 have set down that not 
less than 51% of the aggregate electricity generated by 
a CGP, determined on an annual basis is consumed 
for captive use. However, in case there are more than 
one owner then there is a further rule of proportionality 
in consumption. In case the power plant is set up by a 
cooperative society the condition of use of 51% can be 
satisfied collectively by the members of the cooperative 
society. However, if it is an 'association of persons' 
then the captive users are required to hold not less than 
26% of the ownership of the plant and such captive 
users are required to consume not less than 51% of 
electricity generated determined on an annual basis in 
proportion to the share of the ownership of the power 
plant within a variation not exceeding + 10%. For 
example, if a CGP produces 10,000 kWh of electricity, 
5100 kWh need to be consumed by the owners of 
CGP. In case there are three owners holding equal 
share, each one must consume 1/3rd of the 5100 kWh 
within a variation of + 10% i.e. between 1530 kWh to 
1870 kWh. It will not be proper to assess the 
proportionality of the consumption on 100% of the 
generation. The Commission, however, appears to 
have calculated the proportion of use to 100% of the 
total consumption which may be more than 51% of 
generation….” 
 
45 Supra note 5. 

 
Civil Appeal Nos. 8527-8529 of 2009 etc. 
 
Page 34 of 55 
 
 
We agree with the said reasoning in Kadodara Power46 But we 
would like to elaborate on the said reasoning by referring to the 
clarifications and the illustrations provided by Mr. M.G. 
Ramachandran, learned Senior Advocate appearing on behalf of 
the appellant – Dakshin Gujarat Vij Company Limited.  
 
43. 
The last portion of the second proviso to Rule 3(1)(a) of the Rules, 
that is, the proportionality principle, specifies an unitary qualifying 
ratio. The unitary qualifying ratio is the consumption requirement 
divided by the shareholding requirement, that is, 51% divided by 
26%. This means that the owner of every 1% shareholding of the 
CGP should have minimum consumption of 1.96% of the electricity 
generated by the CGP, with a variation of +10% being permissible. 
Therefore, the unitary qualifying ratio has to be within a range of 
1.764% to 2.156%. In other words, we do not take into 
consideration 100% of the electricity generated. Instead, we apply 
the shareholding requirement, which should not be less than 26% 
in aggregate, to the electricity consumed, which should not be less 
than 51%, and thereby compute whether the ownership criteria and 
the proportionate consumption criteria is satisfied. Benefit of 
variation by 10% either way is to be a given. 
 
46 Supra note 5. 

 
Civil Appeal Nos. 8527-8529 of 2009 etc. 
 
Page 35 of 55 
 
 
44. 
For clarity, the illustrations provided Mr. M.G. Ramachandran, 
Senior Advocate, are reproduced below: 
Total Generation 
 
 
 
 
100% 
Unitary Qualifying Ratio is Consumption Requirement divided by 
Shareholding Requirement (with a variation of 10%) i.e. 51% 
divided by 26% which equals to 1.96% consumption by a captive 
user for every 1% shareholding 
Consumption Requirement (Not less 
than) 
51% 
Shareholding Requirement (Not less 
than) 
26% 
 
 
Shareholder 
Actual 
Consumption 
Actual 
Shareholding 
Unitary 
Ratio 
Achieved 
 
Remarks 
 
Result 
Illustration 1 
A 
20 
10.2 
1.96 
 
A, B, C, D, and E (all) consume not less than 1.96% 
for 1% shareholding and therefore all qualify as 
captive users. All collectively own more than 26% 
shareholding. 
 
A to E 
qualify as 
captive 
users 
B 
20 
10.2 
1.96 
C 
20 
10.2 
1.96 
D 
20 
10.2 
1.96 
E 
20 
10.2 
1.96 
Others 
0 
49 
0 
Illustration 2 
A 
15 
7 
2.14 
 
A, B, C, D, and E (all) consume more than 1.96% 
for 1% shareholding and therefore all qualify as 
captive 
users. 
All 
collectively 
own 
26% 
shareholding. 
 
A to E 
qualify as 
captive 
users 
B 
15 
6 
2.5 
C 
15 
5 
3 
D 
15 
4 
3.75 
E 
15 
4 
3.75 
Others 
25 
74 
- 
Illustration 3 
 
A 
 
30 
 
10 
 
3 
A, B and C qualify the captive consumption qua 
their shareholding in the ratio of not less than 1.96% 
of 1% shareholding. The ratio of D is not above 
1.96, yet it qualifies on account of its ratio being 
within the permissible limit of 10% variation. E does 
not qualify as unitary consumption is 1.67% only, 
i.e. less than 1.96% per 1% shareholding and the 
same does not fall within 10% variation. Excluding 
E, the shareholding held by A, B, C and D is 33% 
i.e. not less than 26%. Hence A, B, C and D qualify 
as Captive users. 
The disqualification of E will not affect A, B, D and 
D as they cumulatively consume more than 51% 
and hold 33% i.e. not less than 26%. 
 
 
 
 
A to D 
qualify as 
captive 
users. E is 
not a 
captive 
user. 
 
B 
 
30 
 
10 
 
3 
 
C 
 
20 
 
10 
 
2 
 
D 
 
5.75 
 
3 
 
1.92 
 
E 
 
5 
 
3 
 
1.67 
 
Others 
 
9.25 
 
64 
 
- 
Illustration 4 
 
A 
 
25 
 
6 
 
4.17 
A, B, C and D qualify the captive consumption qua 
their shareholding in the ratio of not less than 1.96% 
for 1% shareholding. E does not qualify as unitary 
consumption is 1% only, i.e. less than 1.96% per 
1% shareholding. Excluding E, the shareholding 
held by A, B, C and D however is only 21%. Since 
cumulatively A, B, C, and D do not hold not less 
than 26%, by virtue of Rule 3(2) of Electricity Rules, 
2005, they cannot claim captive user status. 
 
 
 
 
No one 
qualifies as 
captive 
user 
 
B 
 
20 
 
5 
 
4 
 
C 
 
15 
 
5 
 
3 
D 
10 
5 
2 
E 
5 
5 
1 
Others 
25 
74 
- 
Illustration 5 
 
 
A 
 
 
30 
 
 
1 
 
 
30 
Neither of A or B qualify as captive user even 
though they collectively satisfy the requirements of 
minimum shareholding of not less than 26% and 
minimum consumption of not less than 51%. B does 
not qualify as unitary consumption is less than 
1.95% and not within the 10% variation. A or B 
independently do not satisfy the shareholding and 
consumption requirements. By virtue of Rule 3(2) of 
 
 
 
 
No one 
qualifies as 
captive 
user 
 
 
B 
 
 
21 
 
 
25 
 
 
0.84 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Civil Appeal Nos. 8527-8529 of 2009 etc. 
 
Page 36 of 55 
 
 
Others 
 
49 
 
74 
 
- 
Electricity Rules, 2005, they cannot claim captive 
user status 
  
Once the above standard is met and satisfied, the person satisfying 
the requirement will be treated as a member of the group captive 
users. 
 
45. 
The aforesaid interpretation checks, “gaming”, by owners, which 
would amount to misuse and abuse of the Rule 3(1)(a) of the Rules. 
Instances of gaming are where a 1% or an insignificant shareholder 
of the CGP disproportionately uses the electricity generated, in 
which case he should not be treated as a group captive user and, 
therefore, should be denied the benefits that are given under the 
Act to the captive users. Gaming or misuse should be checked to 
protect interests of the Distribution Licensee.  
 
46. 
This brings us to the question of applicability of the second proviso 
of Rule 3(1)(a) in cases where there is a change in ownership or 
shareholding of the CGP. An issue arises with respect to calculation 
of proportional consumption of electricity under the second proviso 
to Rule 3(1)(a) of the Rules when an existing captive user 
exits/transfers their shareholding/ownership to a new captive user. 
It may happen in multiple situations. The APTEL in Tamil Nadu 

 
Civil Appeal Nos. 8527-8529 of 2009 etc. 
 
Page 37 of 55 
 
Power47 had postulated that such issue would be resolved if the 
minimum consumption and shareholding requirements are verified 
only at the end of the financial year. However, we have held that 
the minimum consumption and shareholding requirement are 
required to be maintained continuously and not just at the end of 
the year. It is only with respect to determining the ownership 
proportionate to consumption of electricity that requires our 
attention, with respect to the second proviso to Rule 3(1)(a) of the 
Rules.    
 
47. 
In case of change of ownership, shareholding, or consumption, the 
principle of weighted average should be applied to ensure 
compliance of the proportional electricity consumption requirement 
stipulated under the second proviso to Rule 3(1)(a). For instance, if 
a captive consumer exits or drops out in the middle of the year, 
transferring its shareholding to another or new captive user, it would 
be fair to hold that the captive user who has become a shareholder 
in the middle of the year, is required to consume proportionately to 
the electricity generated. In a given case, existing captive users 
taking advantage of the variation, may enhance their consumption. 
The concept of weighted average shareholding comes in aid to 
calculate the relevant average shareholding of the captive user in 
 
47 Supra note 6. 

 
Civil Appeal Nos. 8527-8529 of 2009 etc. 
 
Page 38 of 55 
 
the year and the proportionate electricity required to be consumed 
by him. To borrow from the illustrations provided by learned Senior 
Advocate Mr. Basava Prabhu Patil, appearing on behalf of Tata 
Power Company Limited, this comes in aid in instances where the 
shareholding of a captive user in a CGP fluctuates, provided that 
the minimum ownership requirement of 26% in aggregate is not 
being breached. Further, a shareholder may hold 30% of shares of 
the CGP for 3 months, 40% of shares for 4 months, and 50% of the 
shares for the balance 12 months. The weighted average 
shareholding method is applied by taking average shareholding 
held by particular shareholder for the year for the purpose of 
calculating proportionate electricity required to be consumed by it 
in terms of the second proviso of Rule 3(1)(a).  
 
48. 
We agree with the reasoning and logic, that weighted shareholding 
and proportionate consumption of electricity is the fair, equitable 
and the correct method to determine whether the essential 
requirements of the second proviso to Rule 3(1)(a) are satisfied.  
 
Issue III 
Whether a company set up as a Special Purpose 
Vehicle48 for generating electricity is an ‘association of 
persons’ 
which 
must 
meet 
the 
proportionality 
requirement specified in the second proviso to Rule 
3(1)(a) of the Rules. 
 
48 For short, “SPV”. 

 
Civil Appeal Nos. 8527-8529 of 2009 etc. 
 
Page 39 of 55 
 
49. 
This brings us to the last issue and question – whether a company 
set up as a SPV, in view of clause Rule 3(1)(b) of the Rules, is 
absolved from meeting the eligibility criteria specified in paragraphs 
(i) and (ii) of Rule 3(1)(a) of the Rules read with second proviso to 
Rule 3(1)(a) of the Rules. This argument was raised and accepted 
in Tamil Nadu Power49 on the following grounds:  
“255. We have analysed the submissions of the parties 
on the issue of treatment of an SPV as an AOP. As seen 
before, Rule 3 of the Rules deals with the requirements 
to be fulfilled to qualify as a captive. In the said rule, 
SPV as a CGP is given under Rule 3 (1)(b). Further, it 
is also seen that Rule 3(1)(a)(i) has two provisos 
contemplating the manner in which the requirements to 
qualify as a CGP is to be fulfilled by a registered Co-
operative society and an AOP. It is also seen that the 
said two provisos do not relate to Rule 3(1)(b) which 
deals with a SPV.  
256. We agree with the submission put forward by the 
Appellant that second proviso to Rule 3(1)(a) is a 
stand-alone provision and as such does not relate to 
Rule 3 (1)(b). The Parliament in its wisdom has created 
an intelligible differentia under Rule 3, between a SPV 
and an AOP. It is clear from a reading of Rule 3 that 
second proviso to Rule 3(1)(a) which exclusively deals 
with an AOP, lays down that the captive user (s) shall 
hold not less than 26% ownership of the plant in 
aggregate and shall not consume less than 51% of the 
electricity generated, determined on an annual basis, 
in proportion to their ownership of the power plant.  
257. On the other hand, Rule 3(1)(b) exclusively deals 
with a SPV, and it only provides that the conditions 
mentioned in Rule 3(1)(a)(i) and (ii) are applicable to a 
SPV, with the second proviso not mandated to be 
applied to it. Thus, we find force in the argument of the 
Appellant that second Proviso to Rule 3(1)(a) is a 
stand-alone provision.  
 
49 Supra note 6. 

 
Civil Appeal Nos. 8527-8529 of 2009 etc. 
 
Page 40 of 55 
 
258. The above argument of the Appellant is further 
strengthened on the principles enunciated by the 
Hon'ble Supreme Court with regard to interpretation of 
statutes by Courts. The Hon'ble Supreme Court has 
time and again held that Courts cannot rewrite or 
recast legislation, they should not act as law makers 
where there is no ambiguity in the language in a piece 
of legislation then such legislation ought to be literally 
interpreted without any deviation. The Hon'ble 
Supreme Court has also held that provisos are 
exceptions to the general rule. In this regard, we refer 
to the following judgments: 
 
xx 
xx 
xx 
 
259. From the principles drawn from the above 
judgments, we observe that TNERC vide the impugned 
order particularly in para 6.4.4 has endeavoured to add 
an intention to Rule 3(1)(b) which was otherwise 
absent from its construction. By holding that the 
second proviso to Rule 3(1)(a) is applicable to Rule 
3(1)(b) thereby equating a SPV with an AOP, the 
impugned order has committed an error in interpreting 
the said Rule in the manner in which it has been 
enacted by the Parliament. We also concur with the 
principles laid down in the cases of Kailash Nath 
(supra) and Sanjay Kumar (Supra) that a proviso is an 
exception and it cannot travel beyond the provision to 
which it is a proviso. We therefore, find that the same 
are applicable in the facts of the present Appeal. It is 
settled law that the function of a proviso is to except 
something out of the enactment or to qualify something 
enacted therein which but for the proviso would be 
within the purview of the enactment. Applying this clear 
jurisprudence, TNERC could not have applied the 
second proviso to Rule 3(1)(a) to Rule 3(1)(b). Hence, 
the requirement of consuming minimum of 51% 
electricity generated on an annual basis and the 
requirement of the captive users holding 26% of the 
ownership of the plant in aggregate, and such 
consumption being in proportion to the shares of 
ownership of the power plant can only be applicable to 
power plants set- up by an AOP but cannot be applied 
to power plants set-up by SPV.  
 

 
Civil Appeal Nos. 8527-8529 of 2009 etc. 
 
Page 41 of 55 
 
50. 
Kadodara Power50 takes the opposite view, and the APTEL has 
reasoned: 
“Is a company formed as a special purpose vehicle an 
association of person?  
15. The question has arisen because the word 
'association of persons' is not defined anywhere in the 
Act or in the Rules. The proviso to Rule 3 (l)(a)(ii) 
makes two special conditions for cooperative societies 
and association of persons. If the CGP is held by a 
person it is sufficient that the person consumes not less 
than 51% of the aggregate electricity generated in such 
plant. In case the plant is owned by a registered 
cooperative society then all the members together 
have to collectively consume 51% of the aggregate 
electricity generated. In case the CGP is owned by an 
association of persons the captive users together shall 
hold not less than 26% of the ownership of the plant in 
aggregate and shall consume not less than 51% of the 
electricity generated in proportion to their shares of the 
ownership of the plant within a variation not exceeding 
+ 10%. A special purpose vehicle is a legal entity 
owning, operating and maintaining a generating station 
with no other business or activity to be engaged in by 
the legal entity. Now if three companies need to set up 
the power plant primarily for their own use they can 
come together and form another legal entity which may 
itself be a company registered under the Companies 
Act. This company may set up a power plant. In that 
case the company formed by three different companies 
would become a special purpose vehicle. If a company 
which is a special purpose vehicle is one person then 
all that is necessary is that this company should 
consume 51% of the generation. However, if it is 
treated as association of persons apart from a 
condition of consuming minimum 51% of its generation 
the three share holders will also have to consume 51% 
of the generation in proportion to their ownership in the 
power plant. It is contended on behalf of some of the 
appellants before us who are special purpose vehicles 
that they are not an association of persons and 
accordingly it is only necessary for them to consume 
51% of their generation collectively without adhering to 
 
50 Supra note 5. 

 
Civil Appeal Nos. 8527-8529 of 2009 etc. 
 
Page 42 of 55 
 
the Rule of proportionality of consumption to their 
share. This does not appear to us to be the correct 
view. Section 2(8) of the Act, as extracted above, says 
that a captive generating plant may be set up by any 
person and includes the power plant set up by any 
cooperative society or association of persons. Mr. M. 
G. Ramachandran contends that going by this 
definition if the special purpose vehicle is not an 
association of persons it cannot set up a captive 
generating plant because the definition does not 
mention any person other than a cooperative society 
and association of person. There is small flaw in the 
argument of Mr. M. G. Ramachandran in as much as 
the definition of captive generating plant is inclusive. In 
other words, the captive generating plant may be set 
up by any person including a cooperative society or 
association of persons. In other words, the person to 
set up a generating plant may be somebody who does 
not fulfill the description of either a cooperative society 
or association of persons. Nonetheless, reading the 
entire Rule 3 as a whole it does appear to us that a 
CGP owned by a special purpose vehicle has to be 
treated as an association of person and liable to 
consume 51% of his generation in proportion to the 
ownership of the plant. Every legal entity is the person. 
Therefore, the special purpose vehicle which has to be 
a legal entity shall be a person in itself. Any generating 
company or a captive generating company is also a 
person. The Rules specially deals with cooperative 
society. In an association of persons it has to be a 
'person' because without being a person it cannot set 
up a captive generating plant. Therefore it will be wrong 
to say that since the special purpose vehicle is a 
'person' in itself it cannot be covered by a definition of 
'association of persons' and has to be covered by the 
main provision which requires the owner to consume 
51% or more of the generation of the plant. In our view 
the definition is somewhat strange in as much as the 
term 'person' is said to include an 'association of 
persons'. One therefore cannot say that a CGP owner 
can be either a 'person' or an 'association of persons' 
a special purpose vehicle thus can be a 'person' as well 
as an 'association of persons'. A cooperative society is 
an 'association of persons' in the sense that some 
persons come together to form a cooperative society. 
However, the moment an association or society is 
formed according to the legal provisions it becomes a 

 
Civil Appeal Nos. 8527-8529 of 2009 etc. 
 
Page 43 of 55 
 
person in itself. A special provision has been made 
permitting a cooperative society from consuming 51% 
collectively. The first proviso 3 (1)(a)(ii) itself suggests 
that a special privilege has been conferred on a 
cooperative society. Other persons who are also legal 
entities formed by several persons coming together 
have not been given such special privilege. Who can 
such association of persons be? Of the various legal 
entities comprehended as persons owning a CGP the 
special purpose vehicle does seem to fit the description 
of 'association of persons'. We fail to comprehend who 
other than a special purpose vehicle can be an 
'association of persons'. None of the lawyers arguing 
before us gave example of 'association of persons' 
other than a special purpose vehicle. Therefore, we 
have no hesitation to hold that special purpose vehicle 
is an association of persons.  
16. In case the special purpose vehicle was not 
required to maintain the rule of proportionality of 
consumption, the Central Government could have 
specifically mentioned the same just as it has done for 
a cooperative society. The Rule having not exempted 
a special purpose vehicle from the requirement of 
consuming 51% of the generation in proportion to the 
ownership of the persons forming the special purpose 
vehicle as has been done in the case of cooperative 
society it will only be rational and logical to hold that a 
special purpose vehicle is also subject to the rule of 
proportionality of consumption to the percentage share 
of ownership as an 'association of persons'.  
 
51. 
We agree with the reasoning giving in Kadodara Power51 Rule 
3(1)(b) of the Rules does not negate or undo the eligibility 
requirements specified in paragraphs (i) and (ii) to Rule 3(1)(a) of 
the Rules, which in case of an association of persons mandates the 
satisfaction of the proportionality requirement under the second 
proviso to Rules 3(1)(a). Rule 3(1)(b) refers to a situation where a 
 
51 Supra note 5. 

 
Civil Appeal Nos. 8527-8529 of 2009 etc. 
 
Page 44 of 55 
 
company set up as a SPV has multiple units generating electricity. 
It stipulates that the company formed as a SPV can identify one or 
more of such generating units for its captive use. All the generating 
units need not be identified for captive use.  The units which are not 
identified for captive use need not satisfy the conditions mentioned 
in paragraphs (i) and (ii) of Rule 3(1)(a) of the Rules. Electricity 
generated by these unidentified units need not be accounted and 
considered. The explanation clarifies the situation as it states that 
the requirement of consumption of electricity by captive users shall 
be determined with reference to the generating unit or units 
identified for captive use. The unit or units identified for captive use, 
in other words, must satisfy the requirements of paragraphs (i) and 
(ii) of Rule 3(1)(a) of the Rules read with the second proviso. This 
is also clear from Rule 3(2), which states that the equity shares held 
by the captive user in the generating station, which is identified for 
captive use, should not be less than 26% of the proportionate equity 
of the company relating to the generating unit or units identified as 
a CGP. The illustration to Section 3(1)(b) that is lucid, for the sake 
of convenience is again reproduced: 
“Illustration.—In a generating station with two units of 
50 MW each namely Units A and B, one unit of 50 MW 
namely Unit A may be identified as the Captive 
Generating Plant. The captive users shall hold not less 
than thirteen per cent of the equity shares in the 
company (being the twenty-six per cent proportionate 

 
Civil Appeal Nos. 8527-8529 of 2009 etc. 
 
Page 45 of 55 
 
to Unit A of 50 MW) and not less than fifty-one per cent 
of the electricity generated in Unit A determined on an 
annual basis is to be consumed by the captive users.” 
 
Thus, Rule 3(1)(b) of the Rules liberalises, gives flexibility and an 
option when a generating station owned by company, incorporated 
as a SPV, has multiple generating units. Rule 3(1)(b) does not undo 
or override the eligibility criteria specified under Rule 3(1)(a) read 
with second proviso. 
 
52. 
It was submitted before us that since a SPV was an incorporated 
company, it could not be equated with an association of persons, 
which is usually understood to mean a recognised taxable entity 
and not as an incorporated entity. Reliance was placed on the 
interpretation by this Court in Ramanlal Bhailal Patel and Others 
v. State of Gujarat52, to contend that whenever an inclusive 
definition is provided for a term, an extended statutory interpretation 
of such term may be adopted. Section 2(49) of the Act uses the 
word “includes”, in the expression, “‘person’ shall include” to define 
a “person” with respect to the Act. Thus such extended statutory 
interpretation for the term, “association of persons”, it is submitted 
is importable from statutes like the Income Tax Act, 1961. We do 
not agree with the said contention.  
 
 
52 (2008) 5 SCC 449; for short, “Ramanlal Bhailal Patel”. 

 
Civil Appeal Nos. 8527-8529 of 2009 etc. 
 
Page 46 of 55 
 
53. 
This Court in Ramanlal Bhailal Patel53, while interpreting the 
meaning of an, “association of persons”, has held that an 
association of persons is one where two or more persons join in a 
common purpose and common action to achieve some common 
benefit. Further, such common purpose, action or benefit may vary 
based on the particular context of a statute.  The relevant paragraph 
reads: 
“28. The terms “association of persons” and “body of 
individuals” (which are interchangeable) have a legal 
connotation and refer to an entity having rights and 
duties. They are not to be understood literally. For 
example, if half a dozen people are travelling in a car or 
a boat, or standing in a bus-stop, they may be a group 
of persons or a “body of individuals” in the literal sense. 
But they are not an association of persons/body of 
individuals in the legal sense. When a calamity occurs 
or a disaster strikes, and a band of volunteers or doctors 
meet at the site and associate or cooperate with each 
other for providing relief to victims, and not doing 
anything for their own benefit, they may literally be an 
association of persons, but they are not “an association 
of persons/body of individuals” in the legal sense. A 
mere combination of persons or coming together of 
persons without anything more, without any intention to 
have a joint venture or carry on some common activity 
with a common understanding and purpose will not 
convert two or more persons into a body of 
individuals/association of persons. An “association of 
persons/body of individuals” is one in which two or more 
persons join in a common purpose and common action 
to achieve some common benefit. Where there is a 
combination of individuals by volition of the parties, 
engaged together in some joint enterprise or venture, it 
is 
known 
as 
“association 
of 
persons/body 
of 
individuals”. The common object will have some 
relevance to determine whether a group or set of 
persons is an association of persons or body of 
 
53 Supra note 52. 

 
Civil Appeal Nos. 8527-8529 of 2009 etc. 
 
Page 47 of 55 
 
individuals with reference to a particular statute. For 
example, when the said terms “association of persons” 
or “body of individuals” occur in a section which 
imposes a tax on income, the association must be one 
the object of which is to produce income, profit or gain 
(vide CIT v. Indira Balkrishna, Mohd. Noorulla v. CIT, 
N.V. Shanmugam and Co. v. CIT and Meera and 
Co. v. CIT). But the object need not always be to carry 
on commercial or business activity. For example, when 
the word “person” occurs in a statute relating to 
agriculture or ceiling on landholding, the term 
“association of persons/body of individuals” may refer 
to a combination of individuals who join together to 
acquire and own land as co-owners and carry on 
agricultural operations as a joint enterprise.” 
 
54. 
Further, in Ramanlal Bhailal Patel54, while elaborating on the 
notion of an association of persons, the Court held that co-owners 
of a property do not automatically become an association of 
persons. Where such co-owners lack a common purpose and 
pursue co-ownership not by their own volition, each of such co-
owners would constitute a different person instead of being referred 
to as single person, as an association of persons/body of 
individuals. The reasoning is reproduced: 
“29. Normally, where a group of persons have not 
become co-owners by their own volition with a common 
purpose, they cannot be considered as a “person”. 
When the children of the owner of a property succeed 
to his property by testamentary succession or inherit by 
operation of law, they become co-owners, but the co-
ownership is not by volition of parties nor do they have 
any common purpose. Each can act in regard to his/her 
share, on his/her own, without any right or obligation 
towards the other owners. The legal heirs though co-
owners, do not automatically become an “association of 
persons/body of individuals”. When different persons 
 
54 Supra note 52. 

 
Civil Appeal Nos. 8527-8529 of 2009 etc. 
 
Page 48 of 55 
 
buy undivided shares in a plot of land and engage a 
common developer to construct an apartment building, 
with individual ownership in regard to respective 
apartment and joint ownership of common areas, the 
co-owners of the plot of land, do not become an 
“association of persons/body of individuals”, in the 
absence of a deeming provision in a statute or an 
agreement. Similarly, when two or more persons merely 
purchase a property, under a common sale deed, 
without any agreement to have a common or joint 
venture, they will not become an “association of 
persons/body of individuals”. Mere purchase under a 
common deed without anything more, will not convert a 
co-ownership into a joint enterprise. Thus when there 
are ten co-owners of a property, they are ten persons 
and not a “body of individuals” to be treated as a “single 
person”. But if the co-owners proceed further and enter 
into an arrangement or agreement to have a joint 
enterprise or venture to produce a common result for 
their benefit, then the co-owners may answer the 
definition of a “person”.” 
 
55. 
Thus, the connotation of the expression, “association of persons”, 
may vary in different statutes based on the particular context in 
which an association of persons is used in that statute. It needs to 
be examined whether such association of persons is pursuing a 
common action to achieve a benefit under the said statute.  
 
56. 
In the context of the Act and Rules, companies or body corporates 
may come together and set up another company as a SPV, with a 
common purpose to achieve the common benefit of becoming 
captive user(s) under the Act and Rules, thereby enjoy the 
advantages provided to captive users such as waiver of paying 
cross subsidy or additional surcharge, as applicable. 

 
Civil Appeal Nos. 8527-8529 of 2009 etc. 
 
Page 49 of 55 
 
 
57. 
Further, explanation 1(d) to Rule 3 of the Rules, defines a SPV to 
mean a legal entity owning, operating, and maintaining a generating 
station with no other business or activity to be engaged in by the 
legal entity. Thus, SPVs have a single purpose as envisaged under 
the Rules, that is, owning, operating and maintaining a generating 
station. A SPV cannot consume the electricity generated by the 
CGP by itself, that is, it cannot be a captive user since its only 
purpose is to own, operate and maintain a generating station. Thus, 
the purpose and objective of companies or body corporates in 
setting up an SPV, which cannot enjoy the benefits provided to 
captive users itself, would be for such body corporates, companies, 
or other persons to enjoy the common benefit of becoming captive 
users. 
 
58. 
Our reasoning is in consonance with section 2(8) of the Act, which 
defines a CGP, and as noticed above categorises CGPs into two 
categories:  
i) 
Single User CGP – the first part of Section 2(8) refers to a 
power plant set up by any person to generate electricity 
primarily for his own use; and 
ii) 
Group User CGP – the second part of Section 2(8) states that 
the power plant set up by any person to generate electricity 

 
Civil Appeal Nos. 8527-8529 of 2009 etc. 
 
Page 50 of 55 
 
primarily for their own use includes a power plant set up by 
any cooperative society or association of persons for 
generating electricity primarily for the use of members of such 
cooperative society or association.  
No other category of CGP is recognised under Section 2(8) of the 
Act.  
 
59. 
The term “person”, as defined in Section 2(49) of the Act, covers a 
wide category of users, including, any company or body corporate 
or association or body of individuals, whether incorporated or not, 
or artificial juridical person.  
 
60. 
The term, “association of persons”, has not been specifically 
defined in the Act. Conversely, the expression, “association or body 
of individuals, whether incorporated or not”, used in the definition of 
“person” under Section 2(49) of the Act widens the scope of a 
“person” to include both juridical and non-juridical persons.  
 
61. 
To reiterate, Section 2(8) of the Act recognises two categories of 
CGPs, that is, single captive users and group captive users. For 
group captive users, only two categories of users are recognised, 
that is, a cooperative society and association of persons. The first 
proviso to Rule 3(1)(a) of the Rules creates an exception for 
cooperative societies. It requires members of the cooperative 

 
Civil Appeal Nos. 8527-8529 of 2009 etc. 
 
Page 51 of 55 
 
society to only collectively satisfy the minimum ownership and 
electricity consumption requirements specified under paragraphs (i) 
and (ii) of Rule 3(1)(a) of Rules. The second proviso to Rule 3(1)(a), 
which refers to association of persons, requires such captive users 
to satisfy the minimum ownership and electricity consumption 
requirements specified under paragraphs (i) and (ii) of Rule 3(1)(a) 
of Rules. Additionally, it also requires such captive users to 
consume electricity generated by the CGP, which shall not be less 
than 51%, in proportion to their individual shares in the ownership 
of the CGP, which shall not be less than 26%. Thus, under the 
Rules, all group captive users which are not registered cooperative 
societies are required to comply with the test of proportionality 
specified in the second proviso to Rule 3(1)(a). 
 
62. 
This Court in S. Sundaram Pillai and Others v. V.R. 
Pattabiraman and Others55 has held that a proviso serves four 
different purposes, as stated below: 
“43. We need not multiply authorities after authorities 
on this point because the legal position seems to be 
clearly and manifestly well established. To sum up, a 
proviso may serve four different purposes: 
(1) qualifying or excepting certain provisions from 
the main enactment: 
 
55 (1985) 1 SCC 591. 

 
Civil Appeal Nos. 8527-8529 of 2009 etc. 
 
Page 52 of 55 
 
(2) it may entirely change the very concept of the 
intendment of the enactment by insisting on certain 
mandatory conditions to be fulfilled in order to 
make the enactment workable: 
(3) it may be so embedded in the Act itself as to 
become an integral part of the enactment and thus 
acquire the tenor and colour of the substantive 
enactment itself; and 
(4) it may be used merely to act as an optional 
addenda to the enactment with the sole object of 
explaining the real intendment of the statutory 
provision.” 
 
Accordingly, the second proviso to Rule 3(1)(a) of the Rules is not 
case specific. It is to be treated as corollary to the interpretation 
embedded under Section 2(8) of the Act, that is, “primarily for its 
own use”. In order make the enactment under Section 2(8) of the 
Act workable in any instance where group captive users are not 
registered cooperative societies, the rule of proportionality under 
the second proviso to Rule 3(1)(a) of the Rules should be read as 
a mandatory condition. 
 
63. 
This Court in Monnet Ispat & Energy Ltd. And Others v. Union 
of India and Others56 held that the minimum electricity 
consumption requirement under paragraph (ii) to Rule 3(1)(a) of the 
Rules conforms with the requirement under Section 2(8) of the Act, 
that electricity generated by the CGP should be “primarily for its 
 
56 C.A. No. 18506-18507 of 2017; for short, “Monnet Ispat”. 

 
Civil Appeal Nos. 8527-8529 of 2009 etc. 
 
Page 53 of 55 
 
own use”. Thus it held that Rule 3(1)(a) of the Rules cannot be said 
to be against the purposes of the Act. This Court in Monnet Ispat57 
observes: 
“14. In the light of what has been discussed by this 
Court in Global Energy Ltd. (supra) when we examine 
definition of Generating Plant in section 2(8) of the Act 
it emphasizes setting up primarily for his own use or in 
case of cooperative society for use by its members. 
When we consider Rule 3(1)(a)(ii) of the Rules of 2005, 
it is clear that it provides not less than 51% of aggregate 
electricity generated in such plant determined on 
annual basis is consumed for captive use. The rule 
conforms to the requirement of section 2(8) that 
primarily electricity should be generated by captive 
generating plant for his own use/members as the case 
may be. The provisions of Rule 3(1)(a)(ii) of the Rules 
of 2005 cannot be said to be against purposes of the 
Act. Rather it promotes rationale of the provision and 
essential qualifications laid down in the Act itself…” 
 
Similarly, the second proviso to Rule 3(1)(a) of the Rules is in 
furtherance of Section 2(8) of the Act.  
 
64. 
An association of companies or body corporates thus are required 
to comply with Rule 3(1)(a) read with the second proviso to Rule 
3(1)(a). Equally, an association of companies, body corporates, or 
other persons that set up a SPV which owns, maintains, and 
operates a CGP is required to comply with Rule 3(1)(a) read with 
the second proviso to Rule 3(1)(a). A SPV in this regard may be 
 
57 Supra note 56. 

 
Civil Appeal Nos. 8527-8529 of 2009 etc. 
 
Page 54 of 55 
 
company, but it also is also an association of persons in terms of 
the second proviso to Rule 3(1)(a).  
 
65. 
We cannot, in any manner, read Rule 3(1)(b) as overriding or 
prevailing over Rule 3(1)(a) of the Rules. To accept this argument 
would, in fact, be accepting that “gaming”, as described above, is 
permissible if a company is formed as a SPV for the purpose of 
generating and supplying electricity to its shareholders or other 
body corporates. For instance, a generating company established 
as an independent power producer being a shareholder of 98% 
shares in a plant can camouflage as a CGP by giving 2% shares to 
group captive users and allowing them to consume 98% of the 
electricity generated. The independent power producer may 
consume only 2% of the electricity generated despite holding 98% 
of the shares in the plant. This would be clearly contrary to Section 
2(8), which uses the expression, “primarily for its own use”. To 
accept this submission would also be contrary to the object and 
purpose behind giving benefit to captive users who spend their 
money and invest in setting up a CGP. While interpreting a 
provision which is ambiguous or debatable, the court or the 
adjudicator must keep in mind the intent of the legislature and read 
the words in a manner that the object and purpose is promoted, 

 
Civil Appeal Nos. 8527-8529 of 2009 etc. 
 
Page 55 of 55 
 
rather than accepting an interpretation which would result in misuse 
or abuse. 
 
66. 
In view of the aforesaid reasoning, we hold that SPVs which own, 
operate and maintain CGPs are an “association of persons” in 
terms of the second proviso to Rule 3(1)(a) of the Rules. 
Companies, body corporates and other persons, who are 
shareholders and captive users of a CGP set up by a SPV, are 
required to comply with Rule 3(1)(a) of the Rules read with the 
second proviso of the Rules. 
 
67. 
We accordingly answer the three issues. 
 
 
......................................J. 
(SANJIV KHANNA) 
 
 
 
......................................J. 
(M.M. SUNDRESH) 
 
NEW DELHI; 
OCTOBER 09, 2023. 
 
