2013 SCC OnLine Pat 966 : (2013) 4 PLJR 210 : (2013) 4 BBCJ 72
In the High Court of Patna
(BEFORE RAMESH KR. DATTA, J.)
Vijay Lakshmi … Petitioner;
Versus
The Bihar State Electricity Board through its 
Chairman, Bailey Road (Jawaharlal Nehru Path), 
Patna & Ors. … Respondents.
CWJC No. 17712 of 2012
Decided on August 12, 2013
Oral Order
1. Heard learned counsel for the petitioner and learned counsel for 
the Bihar State Electricity Board.
2. The petitioner has approached this Court for a direction to the 
respondent Bihar State Electricity Board, now the Bihar State Power 
(Holding) Company Limited, to grant new electric domestic connection 
to the petitioner. The petitioner claims to have be come the owner of 
the property on the basis of a compromise petition filed in a title suit 
for partition of property between the father of the petitioner and others, 
pursuant to which a final decree was drawn up on 25.7.2003. 
Subsequently, the father of the petitioner died in the month of July, 
2006. After the death of the father of the petitioner the petitioner 
decided to shift to her own house alongwith her children and 
accordingly applied for a domestic electric connection before the 
respondent Board on 2.3.2012 having completed all the 
   Page: 211
formalities on her account. The petitioner having not got the electric 
connection has approached this Court.
3. In the counter affidavit filed on behalf of the Board the stand 
taken is that the premises were inspected by the Junior Electrical 
Engineer who informed that on the said premises there was 
outstanding due in the name of Shankar Rai having Account No. 
187973 under LTIS category of service which stood disconnected on 
account of outstanding energy dues of Rs. 2,03,473/-, in sup port of 
which the last bill dated 4.3.2007 showing disconnection has been en 
closed as Annexure-R/B to the counter affidavit. It is thus the stand of 
35
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
© 2026 EBC Publishing Pvt. Ltd., Lucknow.
SCC Online Web Edition: https://www.scconline.com
Printed For: . Uttar Pradesh Electricity Regulatory Commission .
Page 35         Tuesday, July 28, 2026
SCC Online Web Edition, © 2026 EBC Publishing Pvt. Ltd.

the Board that in terms of Clause 4.15(vi) of the Bihar Electricity 
Supply Code, 2007 the petitioner being the owner of the premises is 
duty bound to ensure the payment of the dues of electricity by the 
tenant before the tenant vacates the premises and thus would not be 
en titled to a new electric connection until the same was done.
4. Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that under Section 43 
of the Electricity Act, 2003 the distribution licensee is bound to give 
supply of electricity to any premises within one month from the receipt 
of the application and on failure to supply the same within the said 
statutory fixed period it shall be liable to a penalty extending to one 
thou sand rupees for each day of default. It is also submitted by 
learned counsel that in terms of Section 56(2) of the Act no sum due 
from any consumer shall be recoverable after the period of two years 
from the date when such sum became first due unless such sum has 
been shown continuously as recoverable as arrear of charges for 
electricity sup plied and the licensee shall not cut-off the supply of the 
electricity and, there fore, since more than two years have passed the 
respondents cannot deny the electric connection to the petitioner.
5. It is also the stand of learned counsel that under Clause 4.1 of the 
Electricity Supply Code the respondents are obliged to give supply of 
electricity to the petitioner as the arrears of electricity are not those of 
any associate or relative of the petitioner.
6. Lastly it is submitted by learned counsel that Clause 4.15(vi) of 
the Electricity Supply Code, 2007 has no application in the present 
matter as the present matter arose before the enforcement of the said 
Supply Code.
7. In support of his stand learned counsel for the petitioner relies 
upon a decision of this Court in the case of Smt. Rekha Gupta v. Bihar 
State Electricity Board; 1999 (3) PLJR 222, in paragraphs 8, 11 and 12 
of which it has been held as follows:—
“8. The contention of the learned counsel for the respondents is 
that in case of providing electric connection to the tenant permission 
of the landlord is taken on requisition form and electric connection is 
provided in the premises. Therefore, the land lord or purchaser 
thereof shall be liable to pay electrical dues against the erstwhile 
consumer and unless dues are paid no fresh connection can be 
provided. In this regard it would be pertinent to mention herein that 
for providing electric connection an agreement in between the 
consumer and the Board is entered into for supply of electric energy 
and payment of electrical dues thereof. It is a personal contract 
between the parties and as such contract cannot be enforced against 
third party. A party to the contract has remedy to re cover the dues 
from the party thereto for non-fulfilment of contractual obligation by 
36
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
© 2026 EBC Publishing Pvt. Ltd., Lucknow.
SCC Online Web Edition: https://www.scconline.com
Printed For: . Uttar Pradesh Electricity Regulatory Commission .
Page 36         Tuesday, July 28, 2026
SCC Online Web Edition, © 2026 EBC Publishing Pvt. Ltd.

filing a suit or by initiating a certificate proceeding under the Bihar 
and Orissa Public Demands Recovery Act. It is a personal liability 
   Page: 212
of contracting party and such per sonal liability cannot be fastened with 
the landlord or the bona fide purchaser who is not in any manner 
connected with the erstwhile consumer of the vendor as it is not charge 
over the property. Merely because permission is taken for providing 
electric connection to the tenant it can not be said that the landlord or 
the bona fide purchaser, who is not connected in any manner with the 
erstwhile consumer shall be liable for payment thereof. Similarly, 
Annexure “C” to the counter affidavit says that reconnection of the 
premises should ordinarily be refused till the dues out standing against 
the connection is cleared off in full. It does not say with regard to fresh 
connection. Moreover, it has already been stated that liability to pay 
electrical dues is between contracting parties and the same cannot be 
enforced against third party, as it is a personal contract. Therefore, 
contention of the learned counsel for the respondents has no substance 
at all.
11. Section 24 of the Indian Electricity Act says with regard to 
disconnection of supply of electric energy to consumers neglecting to 
pay the charges and realization of dues. Annexure-C to the counter 
affidavit says that Assistant Electrical Engineer/Electrical Executive 
Engineer must see that security deposits are taken in each case and 
that arrear dues are not allowed to exceed the amount of security 
deposits. As soon as the energy dues are about to exceed the 
amount of security deposits, the supply line of the house should 
immediately, be disconnected after going through the usual 
formalities of serving the required notice. However, if the Board 
allowed the consumer to consume electricity even after non payment 
of dues resulting amount of arrears it cannot take advantage of its 
own wrong and refuse to give new connection to a bona fide 
purchaser on the ground that unless dues against the erstwhile 
consumer is not cleared off in full electric connection cannot be 
provided. Right of realization of dues against the consumer has also 
been provided under the Act i.e. by filing a suit or initiation of 
certificate proceeding.
12. Learned counsel for the respondents, however, relied upon a 
decision in the case of Bhola Shankar Prasad Sah v. Bihar State 
Electricity Board disposed of on 21.12.1995, Annexure-E to the 
counter affidavit in support of his contention. On perusal of the 
37
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
© 2026 EBC Publishing Pvt. Ltd., Lucknow.
SCC Online Web Edition: https://www.scconline.com
Printed For: . Uttar Pradesh Electricity Regulatory Commission .
Page 37         Tuesday, July 28, 2026
SCC Online Web Edition, © 2026 EBC Publishing Pvt. Ltd.

decision as aforesaid, it is evident that the court has taken into 
consideration the re port wherein the authority of the Electricity 
Board stated that earlier consumer and the intending consumer were 
related to each other. They were residing together. Electric 
connection was taken in collusion with each other to deny the Board 
of its legitimate dues and, accordingly, the court observed that new 
service connection could have been sanctioned only after realization 
of dues against service connection no. 34042. In the instant case, 
there is nothing on record to show that the petitioner, the purchaser, 
is in any way connected with the erstwhile consumer i.e. Raj Kumar. 
Therefore, the decision relied upon by the learned counsel for the 
petitioner has no bearing in the facts of the case. Moreover, in the 
case of Suman Packaging Private Limited, Digha Ghat v. The 
Chairman, Bihar State Electricity Board, 1995 (1) B.L.J. 465 a 
Division Bench of this Court has held that refusing to give new 
connection to the purchaser/owner of a unit, who has purchased the 
same in auction held under Section 29 of the State Financial 
Corporation is not justified under the law and he is not bound by any 
personal agreement and is not statutorily liable 
   Page: 213
to clear off the personal dues of the erstwhile consumer. Section 24 of 
the Indian Electricity Act does not apply in case where transferee had 
no connection with original consumer and, accordingly, direction was 
issued to the Electricity Board to give new electric connection to the 
petitioner on the terms and conditions as required under the law. It has 
already been stated that, in fact, there is no distinction between 
purchase in auction or purchase by registered sale deed. Therefore, 
ratio decided is applicable in case of purchases by registered sale deed. 
The said decision was challenged before the Apex Court which was 
considered alongwith other similarly situated case in the case of Isha 
Marbles v. Bihar State Electricity Board, (1995) 2 SCC 648 and the 
Apex Court upheld the decision of this Court.”
8. Learned counsel also relies upon a decision of a learned Single 
Judge of this Court in the case of Archana Devi v. The Chairman, Bihar 
State Electricity Board, 2012 (4) PLJR 701, paragraphs 9 and 13 of 
which are quoted below:—
“9. During the course of argument, learned counsel for the Board 
has produced a copy of the Bihar Electricity Supply Code, 2007 
(herein after referred to as the “Supply Code”). The third proviso to 
Clause 4.1 of the Supply Code requires the purchaser of a property 
38
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
© 2026 EBC Publishing Pvt. Ltd., Lucknow.
SCC Online Web Edition: https://www.scconline.com
Printed For: . Uttar Pradesh Electricity Regulatory Commission .
Page 38         Tuesday, July 28, 2026
SCC Online Web Edition, © 2026 EBC Publishing Pvt. Ltd.

applying for a new connection, to clear the dues, in case he happens 
to be a relative of the person against whom the electricity arrears 
have been noted. Clause 4.15 of the Supply Code also cast a duty on 
the vendor to find out the outstanding dues as on the date of sale 
and also to pay the same.
13. A consideration of the provisions of the Supply Code and the 
recitals of the sale deed manifests that no responsibility or obligation 
has been cast on the petitioner to either make any enquiry as 
regarding pending electricity dues or to clear the same.”
9. Learned counsel also relies upon a decision of the Apex Court in 
the case of Haryana State Electricity Board v. Hanuman Rice Mills, 2010 
(4) PLJR (SC) 61, in paragraphs 8 & 9 of which it has been held as 
follows:—
“8. In Paschimanchal Vidyut Vitran Nigam Ltd. v. D v. Steels & 
Alloys Pvt. Ltd. [(2009) 1 SCC 210] this court held, while reiterating 
the principle that the electricity dues did not constitute a charge on 
the premises, that where the applicable rules requires such 
payment, the same will be binding on the purchaser. This court held:
—
“A transferee of the premises or a subsequent occupant of a 
premises with whom the supplier has no privity of contract cannot 
obviously be asked to pay the dues of his predecessor in title or 
possession, as the amount payable towards supply of electricity 
does not constitute a “charge” on the premises. A purchaser of a 
premises, cannot be foisted with the electricity dues of any 
previous occupant, merely because he happens to be the current 
owner of the premises.
When the purchaser of a premises approaches the distributor 
seeking a fresh electricity connection to its premises for supply of 
electricity, the distributor can stipulate the terms subject to which 
it would sup ply electricity. It can stipulate as one of the 
conditions for supply, that the arrears due in regard to the supply 
of electricity made to the premises when it was in the occupation 
of the previous owner/occupant, should be cleared before the 
electricity supply is restored to the premises or a fresh connection 
is provided to the premises. If 
   Page: 214
any statutory rules govern the conditions relating to sanction of a 
connection or supply of electricity, the distributor can insist upon 
fulfillment of the requirements of such rules and regulations. If the 
rules are silent, it can stipulate such terms and conditions as it deems
39
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
© 2026 EBC Publishing Pvt. Ltd., Lucknow.
SCC Online Web Edition: https://www.scconline.com
Printed For: . Uttar Pradesh Electricity Regulatory Commission .
Page 39         Tuesday, July 28, 2026
SCC Online Web Edition, © 2026 EBC Publishing Pvt. Ltd.

fit and proper, to regulate its transactions and dealings. So long as 
such rules and regulations or the terms and conditions are not arbitrary 
and unreasonable, courts will not interfere with them.
A stipulation by the distributor that the dues in regard to the 
electricity supplied to the premises should be cleared before 
electricity supply is restored or a new connection is given to a 
premises, cannot be termed as unreasonable or arbitrary. In the 
absence of such a stipulation, an un scrupulous consumer may 
commit de faults with impunity, and when the electricity supply is 
disconnected for non-payment, may sell away the property and 
move on to another property, thereby making it difficult, if not 
impossible for the distributor to re cover the dues. Provisions 
similar to Clause 4.3(g) and (h) of Electricity Supply Code are 
necessary to safe guard the interests of the distributor.”
10. The position therefore can may be summarized thus:—
(i) Electricity arrears do not constitute a charge over the property. 
Therefore in general law, a transferee of a premises cannot be 
made liable for the dues of the previous owner/occupier.
(ii) Where the statutory rules or terms and conditions of supply 
which are statutory in character, authorize the supplier of 
electricity, to demand from the purchaser of a property claiming 
re-connection or fresh connection of electricity, the arrears dues 
by the previous owner/occupier in regard to supply of electricity to 
such premises, the supplier can recover the arrears from a 
purchaser.”
11. Learned counsel for the respondent Board, on the other hand, 
has placed reliance upon Clause 4.15(vi) of the Bihar Electricity Supply 
Code,.2007 which is in the following terms:—
“In case the electricity connection to the said premises was given 
with the consent of house owner, such person shall ensure the 
payment of all arrears/dues of electricity by the tenant before the 
tenant vacates the premises.”
12. It is also the contention of learned counsel that the reliance 
placed by learned counsel for the petitioner cannot be of any help as 
those cases related to sale and purchase of premises, whereas in the 
present matter there has been continuity of title and possession of the 
same premises, the same having passed from one member of the 
family of the petitioner to the other by virtue of a compromise decree in 
the title suit.
13. Learned counsel also relies upon a decision of this Court passed 
in CWJC No. 16101 of 2010 (Sanjay Kumar Singh v. The Bihar State 
Electricity Board), disposed of by order dated 2.12.2010 which has 
been annexed as Annexure-R/C to the counter affidavit in which in the
40
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
© 2026 EBC Publishing Pvt. Ltd., Lucknow.
SCC Online Web Edition: https://www.scconline.com
Printed For: . Uttar Pradesh Electricity Regulatory Commission .
Page 40         Tuesday, July 28, 2026
SCC Online Web Edition, © 2026 EBC Publishing Pvt. Ltd.

last but one paragraph it has been held as follows:—
“The Court therefore holds that in view of the provisions of Clause 
4.15(vi) incorporated by the Board for its own protection in terms of 
the discussion contained in the case of Paschimanchal Vidyut Vitran 
Nigam Limited (supra) referred to above, no fault can be found with 
the stand of the Board that until the dues are not cleared, it shall not 
provide electricity connection.”
14. I have considered the submissions of learned counsel for the 
parties. So far as the stand of learned counsel for the petitioner under 
Section 56(2) is concerned, the same has no application in the facts of 
the case as the said 
   Page: 215
section relates to arrears being shown continuously in the Electricity 
Board for the same to continue to be recoverable after a period beyond 
two years. The said issue does not arise in the present case as the 
electric connection was disconnected on 11.3.2007 and the last bill at 
the time of disconnection also clearly shows the entire arrears at the 
relevant time.
15. Similarly I do not find any force in the reliance placed by learned 
counsel for the Board on the provisions of Clause 4.1 of the Electricity 
Supply Code as the third proviso to the said provision applies in the 
case where the applicant is an associate or relative of the defaulting 
consumer and only in such a case if there are arrears of electricity dues 
on a premises a new connection shall not be released to the new 
applicant. Evidently the petitioner cannot be considered either as 
associate or relative of the defaulting consumer, namely, the erstwhile 
tenant of father of the petitioner. The said provision does not in term 
apply to the case of the petitioner.
16. The main issue to be considered in the present matter is the 
applicability of Clause 4.15(vi) of the Electricity Supply Code. From a 
perusal of the said provision it is evident that certain condition must be 
present before the same can be invoked, that is, the electric connection 
to the premises itself must have been given with the consent of the 
house owner and only then the house owner would be liable to pay all 
arrears/dues of Etectricity Board of the tenant of the premises. 
Therefore, until the said condition is satisfied no benefit can be taken of 
the same by the Board. In the present matter there is nothing on the 
record to show that the electric connection to the premises in question 
has been given to the said tenant Shankar Rai with the consent of the 
father of the petitioner. Thus the very precondition to the applicability 
41
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
© 2026 EBC Publishing Pvt. Ltd., Lucknow.
SCC Online Web Edition: https://www.scconline.com
Printed For: . Uttar Pradesh Electricity Regulatory Commission .
Page 41         Tuesday, July 28, 2026
SCC Online Web Edition, © 2026 EBC Publishing Pvt. Ltd.

of sub-clause (vi) does not exist in the present matter.
17. Moreover, the Bihar Electricity Supply Code, 2007 has brought 
into force by publication in the official gazette on 10.1.2008. The 
electric connection in the present matter was admittedly disconnected 
on 11.3.2007 and thus on the date of disconnection the Electricity 
Supply Code, 2007 was not in existence. Hence any liability pertaining 
to the erstwhile tenant who had admittedly vacated the premises with 
respect to his electric connection cannot be foisted on the petitioner so 
as to give retrospective operation to the provisions of Clause 4.15(vi) of 
the Supply Code.
18. Thus on both the counts I find that the respondent Board is 
unable to show how the petitioner can be held liable for the payment of 
the electricity dues of the erstwhile tenant whose connection has been 
disconnected on 11.3.2007. In the said circumstances, the reliance 
placed on the case of Sanjay Kumar Singh (supra) can be of no avail as 
these issues did not at all arise in the said case. Thus in the light of the 
afore said discussions this Court is of the view that it is not open to the 
respondent Board, now the Bihar State Power (Holding) Company 
Limited, to insist upon the payment of the arrears of the erstwhile 
tenant before granting a new domestic electric connection to the 
premises of the petitioner. Let the same be done within a period of one 
month from today in terms of the statutory time limit prescribed under 
Section 43 of the Act.
19. The writ application is, accordingly, disposed of with the 
aforesaid observations and directions.
———
Disclaimer: While every effort is made to avoid any mistake or omission, this casenote/ headnote/ judgment/ act/ rule/ 
regulation/ circular/ notification is being circulated on the condition and understanding that the publisher would not be 
liable in any manner by reason of any mistake or omission or for any action taken or omitted to be taken or advice 
rendered or accepted on the basis of this casenote/ headnote/ judgment/ act/ rule/ regulation/ circular/ notification. All 
disputes will be subject exclusively to jurisdiction of courts, tribunals and forums at Lucknow only. The authenticity of 
this text must be verified from the original source.
42
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
© 2026 EBC Publishing Pvt. Ltd., Lucknow.
SCC Online Web Edition: https://www.scconline.com
Printed For: . Uttar Pradesh Electricity Regulatory Commission .
Page 42         Tuesday, July 28, 2026
SCC Online Web Edition, © 2026 EBC Publishing Pvt. Ltd.