Mohd. Rizvan vs State Of U.P. And 2 Others on 2 February, 2023

Bench: Mahesh Chandra Tripathi, Ajit Singh

HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD

?Court No. - 40

Case :- WRIT - C No. - 38897 of 2022

Petitioner :- Mohd. Rizvan

Respondent :- State Of U.P. And 2 Others

Counsel for Petitioner :- Mohammad Asif

Counsel for Respondent :- CSC,Usha Kiran

Hon'ble Mahesh Chandra Tripathi,J.

Hon'ble Ajit Singh,J.

Heard Mohd. Asif, learned counsel for the petitioner; learned Standing Counsel for the State respondent no.1 and Ms. Usha Kiran, learned counsel for the respondent nos.2 and 3.

Present writ petition is preferred seeking following principal reliefs:-

"(i) Issue a writ, order or direction in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to give new connection to the petitioner to his rented shop i.e. house No.65/4 Moti Mahal Hulaganj Road, Kanpur Nagar.

(ii) Issue a writ, order or direction in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to decide and consider the representation dated 15.11.2022 submitted by the petitioner with regard to give new connection to the petitioner in his rented shop i.e. house No.65/4 Moti Mahal Hulaganj, Road, Kanpur Nagar." 

Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that the petitioner is a tenant in shop in question since last 22 years and doing the work of tailor in the rented shop for his livelihood. Some dispute arose between the petitioner and the landlord and consequently, the landlord has disrupted the electricity connection in the shop in question. Thereafter, the petitioner has applied for new electricity connection before the respondent no.2 but the same has not been accepted on the ground that the petitioner is not the owner of the shop in question and he does not take new connection without permission of the owner. It is submitted that electricity cannot be declined to a tenant on the ground of failure/refusal of the landlord to issue no objection certificate. So far as the grievance of the petitioner is concerned, he has already moved a representation on 15.11.2022 before the respondent no.2 for redressal of his grievance, which is still pending. He has confined his prayer only to the relief that his representation dated 15.11.2022 may be considered by the appropriate authority. 

In support of his submission, learned counsel for the petitioner has placed reliance on the judgement of Apex Court dated 13.5.2022 in Criminal Appeal No.810 of 2022, arising out of Special Leave Petition (Criminal) No.8917 of 2019 (Dilip (dead) and others vs. Satish and others) as well as the judgment of this Court in Writ C No.8396 of 2018 (Gaurav Sharma vs. State of UP and 4 others) decided on 18.9.2018 wherein the Division Bench has proceeded to allow the writ petition with following observations:-

"10. From the annexure that has been appended to the Supply Code as 4.1, one has to declare that he is the owner of the premises and in case if he is not the owner then annexure 4.2 will be the format of the application and in that he has to demonstrate that he is a genuine occupier and not the tress-passer. Annexure 4.2 is an indemnity bond which has to be filled in and to be annexed along with an application for grant of electricity connection, but what is required further, is clause 4.4(i) of the Supply Code that provides for the documents that have to be annexed in which one has to supply proof of ownership of premises in the form of registered sale deed etc. or heirship certificate. In the event of a mere occupancy, one has to give document of Power of Attorney or rent receipt or valid lease deed or indemnity bond as per annexure 4.2. In the indemnity bond while one makes a declaration that though he has not been able to get the NOC from the owner of the land but he has to declare that he is in occupation of the premises either by virtue of valid Power of Attorney or by latest rent receipt or registered lease deed. The object is to deny connection to a tress-passer or a house grabber. So is also the purpose of executing the indemnity bond. Applying the aforesaid provisions to the facts of the present case, we find that the applicant, though is in possession of the premises, as he claims but he is an occupier of the premises being son of the owner, a genuine occupier. It has also been a fact so stated that he has been depositing the house tax and has annexed receipts thereof. 

11. In this case we have noticed that father is residing in different premises whereas the petitioner is residing separately in the premises in question, where he has applied for electricity connection. Son is naturally a successor of his father and we see no reason as to why Electricity Department cannot provide electricity connection by getting indemnity bond fulfilled by the petitioner as required under the Supply Code, 2005. 

12. Thus, here is a clear case of family dispute between the father in law with his daughter in law and the NOC is not being given or in other words objection has been raised only on account of this dispute. Under the circumstances, the applicant in spite of being son, his family is forced to live without electricity. In our considered opinion the petitioner's case is covered by the judgment of this Court (supra). 

13. In view of the above, the impugned order is quashed, respondents are directed to reconsider grant of the electricity connection to the petitioner by getting all formalities fulfilled preferably within a period of three weeks from the date of production of a certified copy of this order." 

No useful purpose would be served in keeping the writ petition pending. 

In view of above, without expressing any opinion on the merits of the issue and considering the facts and circumstances of the case, this writ petition is disposed of finally with a direction to the respondent nos.2 and 2 to take final call in the matter strictly in accordance with law but certainly taking into account the judgement rendered by the Division Bench in Garauv Sharma's case within a period of three months from the date of production of a certified copy of this order before him. 

Order Date :- 2.2.2023

RKP 

 

 

About
Disclaimer
Privacy Policy
Terms
Case Removal
Blog
Share URL

Desktop View