

===== A15 PAGE 1/10 =====
ELECTRICITY OMBUDSMAN,
UTTAR PRADESH

Representation No. 15 of 2026

kKKKKK

M/s J. K. Industries, through its proprietor Mrs. Seema Jaiswal, situated at Belhari,
Maharajganj, Akbarpur, District-Ambedkar Nagar, U.P.
sesweswens Representationist

VERSUS

hie Managing Director, Madhyanchal Vidyut Vitran Nigam Ltd., 4-A, Gokhle Marg,
Lucknow.
2 Executive Engineer, MVVNL, Vidyut Vitran Khand-Tanda, Ambedkar Nagar.

cnwnane Respondents
Counsel of Representationist : Mr. Ajay Vikram Singh, Lucknow.
Counsel of Respondent No. 2 : Mr. Amarjeet Singh Rakhra, Lucknow.
ORDER

The instant Representation has been filed by M/s J. K. Industries, through its proprietor
Mrs. Seema Jaiswal, situated at Belhari, Maharajganj, Akbarpur, District-Ambedkar Nagar,
U.P., which has been registered as Representation No. 15 of 2026 dated 10.03.2026.

The Representation has been filed as the Writ-C No. 12243 of 2025 filed before the
Hon’ ble High Court of Judicature at Allahabad, Lucknow, has been disposed of by the Hon’ble
High Court, on Representationist’s wish to withdraw with liberty granted to him to approach
this Court, vide Order dated 09.01.2026 as follows: -

i. “Heard learned counsels appearing for the parties.

Z. Upon reconsideration of the matter, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the
petitioner wishes to withdraw the present writ petition with liberty to file a fresh

application/representation before the Electricity Ombudsman.

3. In light of the above submissions made, the writ petition is disposed of with liberty
granted to the petitioner to approach the Electricity Ombudsman in accordance with

”

law.

Page 1 of 10
fu


===== A15 PAGE 2/10 =====
The representation was heard on 07.04.2026, 28.04.2026, 16.06.2026 and 07.07.2026.

Learned counsel for Respondents and counsel for Representationist Mr. Ajay Vikram Singh

participated in the proceedings. Heard both the parties in detail and reserved Order.

The Representationist, J.K. Industries, in its representation dated 23.02.2026 has

submitted as below: -

“This complaint is being filed in terms of the Order dated January. 09, 2026 passed by
the Hon'ble High Court, Lucknow Bench in Petition No. Writ-C No. 12243 of 2025 (J.K.
Industries Ltd Vs. State of U.P. & Others). This is the first complaint on this subject matter and
no other case on this issue is pending any other Court or Tribunal. The complainant J.K.
Industries is a registered firm under the GST Act having an Industrial Connection with Account
I.D. No. 731813859992 and a sanctioned load of 80 HP under (MV-6 Category). The supply
to the complainant was given from the 11 KV Ariya feeder originating from 33/11 KV Surapur
substation originating from the 220/132 KV New Tanda Kurki Bazar, Ambedkar Nagar
Substation. From 19.05.2018 the complainant started the manufacture of door and windows
hinges, and before that in the year 2017 in the Global Investor Summit the complainant herein
signed a memorandum of understanding approving a project of 1.95 crores for it. The
complainant's unit had engaged 80 women and 40 male workers and their livelihood totally
depended upon this unit. Till 20.11.2020, the production in the complainant's unit ran smoothly
as about six hours of electricity was regularly supplied to it. But thereafter the quantum of
electricity supplied to the complainant's unit was drastically reduced from the earlier six hours
of daily electricity supply to only two hours of electricity. This resulted in reduced production
leading to losses. For about eight months the complainant personally met the officers of the
opposite parties and also contacted them on telephone to stream line the power supply, however
nothing happened. Thereafter the complainant on 10.08.2021 submitted a representation to the
District Magistrate, Ambedkar Nagar and also to the Deputy Commissioner Industries/
Coordinator, Entrepreneurship Promotion Industries Development Centre, Ambedkar Nagar
requesting therein to stream line the electricity supply in its premises. On 29.12.2021 a meeting
of Zila Udhyog Bandhu was held in which the issue regarding the supply of electricity to J.K.
Industries was raised by the representative of the complainant herein, on which the President
Udhyog Bandhu directed the complainant to apply for electricity connection from the Akbarpur
VIP feeder. As per the directions issued by the President Udhyog Bandhu the complainant
herein applied for the electricity connection from the Akbarpur VIP feeder through Letter dated

ve Page 2 of 10



===== A15 PAGE 3/10 =====
04.01.2022. The copy of this letter was also forwarded to the District Magistrate Ambedkar
Nagar, CDO Ambedkar Nagar and Deputy Commissioner Industries Ambedkar Nagar. In the
letter it was stated that the applicant was ready to comply with all the formalities required for
availing the electricity connection. On the direction issued in the meeting of Zila Udhyog
Bandhu held on 29.12.2021 and the subsequent directions issued by the District Magistrate
Ambekar Nagar, the Executive Engineer, EDD-Tanda wrote Letter dated 30.12.2021 to the
Superintending Engineer, Vidhut Vitran Mandal-Akbarpur, Ambekar Nagar for ensuring
supply to the complainant's industry from 09 A.M. to 5 P.M. The Superintending Engineer vide
his Letter dated 31.12.2021 address to the Director Technical MVVNL, Lucknow informed
him with regard to the electricity supply to J.K. Industires and for issuing directions for
supplying electricity as per the directions issued by the District Magistrate Ambedkar Nagar to
the complainant. Again on 07.01.2022 the Superintending Engineer, MVVNL Akbarpur,
Ambedkar Nagar wrote another letter to Director Technical MVVNL with regard to supplying
electricity to J.K. Industries from 07 A.M. to 10 P.M. In spite of the fact that the complainant
industry was receiving electricity only for two hours a day, the owner continued to operate the
industry as she was hopeful that the supply of electricity will improve as the higher authorities
had given sufficient assurance. This was also the period of Covid-19 pandemic and in spite of
the fact that owner was infected by the virus she did not close the factory just in order to give
some employment to the 80 women and 40 men workers of the factory. However, the electricity
supply did not improve and finally the complainant's unit was closed after somehow finishing
and supplying the last Order on 08.08.2022 to Nepal. Thus, for more than eighteen months the
complainant was forced to somehow operate her unit at two hours electricity supply daily. This
resulted in huge losses to the complainant as raw materials had already been purchased on the
basis of orders received. However, because of low production timing the contract could not be
fulfilled. It resulted in a loss of 7.5 crore rupees to the complainant. From the above stated
facts, it is clear that the respondents were solely responsible for the losses that occurred to the
complainant. On 03.10.2023 the complainant wrote a letter to the District Magistrate Ambedkar
Nagar, detailing the conduct of the opposite parties herein and informed about the financial
loss that had occurred to the complainant. A request was also made in the letter to improve the
electricity supply so that the industry can be re-operated. Taking cognizance of the Letter dated
03.10.2023 addressed to the District Magistrate Ambedkar Nagar, the Deputy Commissioner
Zila Udhyog Promotion and Entrepreneurship Development Centre Ambedkarnagar, wrote two

letters dated 11-10-2023 and 29-11-2023 addressed to the Superintending Engineer, Akbarpur

hao

Page 3 of 10


===== A15 PAGE 4/10 =====
and Executive Engineer Tanda, Akbarpur for restarting proper electricity supply to J.K.
Industries. The letter also informed about the loss that had occurred to the complainant because
of low supply of electricity. On 18.11.2023 the complainant herein submitted another letter on
this issue to the District Magistrate Ambedkar Nagar in the Janta Darshan Programme of the
District Magistrate. On this letter, the then Executive Engineer Tanda, Mohit Kumar submitted
a wrong report that the electricity connection of J.K. Industry has been disconnected on
09.06.2022 because of non-payment of dues and P.D. has been done on 24.04.2023. It is
submitted that the report of the Executive Engineer is wrong as the unit continued the operation
till 08.08.2022 in spite of the fact that it was receiving only two hours of electricity supply in
a day, but the complainant in a hope that the situation of the supply will improve continued
operating the factory. The complainant is an ISO certified industry and its products were ISI
mark certified. The industry had its Trade Mark registered and had an import-export license
issued from the Government of India. It had gainfully employed 120 workers all from its village
where it was located. It was doing a good business even with a mere six hours electricity supply.
However, this electricity supply was for no reasons drastically reduced to two hours daily. Even
then the complainant continued to somehow operate the unit in a hope that the situation will
improve soon. The complainant ran from pillar to post petitioning every concerned authority
from the electricity department and also the concerned administrative officers. She also sent
letters to the Chief Minister's office and the PMO. All the necessary assurances were given to
her. Even necessary correspondence in this regard was made from the office of Respondents in
Akbarpur to the head office of MVVNL in Lucknow, However the ground situation never
improved. As a result, the complainant had to incur losses worth 7.5 Crore rupees. The unit
had to be closed and all the workers became jobless. The first representation in this regard was
given on 10.08.2021 and till 25.10.2025 the complainant made several representations to the
concerned authorities of the respondent, however the condition of electricity supply did not
improve resulting in closure of the unit. Finally, on 09.12.2025 the complainant filed a Writ
Petition before the High Court, Lucknow Bench with a prayer to direct the respondent MV VNL
Lucknow to pay Rs. 7.5 crores as compensation to the petitioner. The Hon'ble High Court vide
its Order dated 09.012026 disposed off the petition with liberty to approach the Electricity
Ombudsman Lucknow in this regard. Hence the complainant is filing this complaint before the

Hon'ble Ombudsman with the following.

hae Page 4 of 10


===== A15 PAGE 5/10 =====
A- Issue an order directing the respondents to compensate the complainant by paying him
Rs. Seven Crores fifty lakhs as losses which has occurred to it because of the poor

electricity supply to its unit.

B- Issue an order directing the respondents to restore the electricity supply of the
complainant's unit and also ensure that regular supply from 09 A.M. to 05 P.M. of

electricity per day is given to the unit.

C- Pass any other order in favour of the complainant which in the circumstances of the

case the Hon'ble Ombudsman deems fit and proper.”

The Respondent No. 2 Executive Engineer, MVVNL, Vidyut Vitran Khand-Tanda,
Ambedkar Nagar, in its Reply dated 25.04.2026 filed has submitted as below: -

“The contents of paragraph No. 1 of the Representation relate to the Order passed by the
Hon'ble High Court in Writ-C No. 12243 of 2025 and being a matter of record the same calls
for no specific reply. However, it may be pertinent to point out that from a bare perusal of the
order it becomes clear that the petition was disposed of by the Hon'ble High Court in terms of
the undertaking given by the Counsel for the petitioner, to the effect that he wishes to withdraw
the Writ Petition with liberty to file a Representation before the Electricity Ombudsman. Thus,
it would be incorrect to suggest that the Representation under reply is being filed under the
direction of the Hon'ble High Court or that the same becomes maintainable as it is being filed
pursuant to the direction given by the Hon'ble High Court. As a matter of fact, the
Representation under reply is not maintainable before the Electricity Ombudsman as the
Electricity Ombudsman has no original jurisdiction to entertain disputes relating to the
consumers of energy. Furthermore, the disputes of the present nature are not maintainable
before the Electricity Ombudsman. The contents of Paragraph No. 2 of the Representation are
a matter of record and call for no specific reply. However, it would be pertinent to point out
that the Electricity Ombudsman exercises Appellate/Supervisory Jurisdiction over the decision
and proceedings before the CGRF and the Electricity Ombudsman does not have any original
jurisdiction. The contents of Paragraph No. 3 of the Representation are factual in nature and
call for no specific reply. The contents of Paragraph No. 4 & 5 of the Representation are not
germane to the controversy involved in the present case and therefore call for no specific reply.
The contents of Paragraph No. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 & 12 of the Representation under reply are
false and are denied in the manner stated. It is wrong to suggest that the Department was at any

fault which led to losses at the end of the petitioner. The number of hours of supply to any

Page 5 of 10


===== A15 PAGE 6/10 =====
consumer, depends upon several considerations/factors, including but not limited to the nature
of the Feeder, the location of the industry, nature of Industry, the availability of supply of
energy with the Department and the terms and conditions of the Agreement for supply. Every
Agreement executed by the Department with the consumer contains a specific stipulation that
the department will not be responsible to the consumer, in any manner whatsoever, for reduced
or irregular supply for reasons beyond its control. The department has never undertaken to
indemnify the consumer for any losses that the consumer may suffer due to the nature or
manner of supply of energy. The petitioner may be required to file the terms and conditions of
supply of energy / the Agreement, which the consumer would have executed with the
Department at the time of availing the supply. If the industry of the consumer was heavily
reliant upon continuous supply of energy or regular supply during specific hours, the consumer
could have opted for the facility of Protective Load. The consumer was being supplied through
a Rural Feeder and the supply was in terms of the roaster determined by the UPSLDC. It is not
as if the consumer / petitioner was being victimized or targeted in any unwarranted manner by
the Department. The contents of Paragraph No. 13 of the Representation are false and are
vehemently denied. The petitioner should have had reasonable foresight to gauge risk
associated with his business. A perusal of Annexure No. 7, 8 and 9 of the Representation makes
it clear that there was almost 18 hours of supply per day which was available to the consumer
albeit not as per the choice of preferred hours. The frivolity of the claim of the petitioner is
further apparent from the perusal of Annexure No. 11, where the purported losses upto the last
declared date of business viz. 08.08.2022, was projected at Rs. 5 Crore. The so-called chart
showing business losses of the petitioner is a fictitious document, created in petitioner's self-
interest. The contents of para 14, 15 &16 of the Representation are false and are denied in the
manner stated. It is noteworthy that as per the petitioner's own claim, his industry got shut down
and stopped production on 08.08.2022, due to sparce availability of power. Therefore, it is
hypothetical for the petitioner to make a request to restart the supply to the industry on
03.10.2023, without there being any improvement in the condition of supply. The consumer
has suppressed the fact that its connection was temporarily disconnected on 09.06.2022 on
outstanding dues and since, the petitioner failed to clear its outstanding dues, as such his
connection was permanently disconnected on 24.04.2023 and that his current outstanding dues
are to the tune of Rs. 2,14,119/-. Therefore, it is clear that the present petition is surrogate in
nature. The petitioner with a view to keep the recovery of the Department (towards its

outstanding dues) at bay, has filed the present petition, falsely asserting that it deserves to be

h- Page 6 of 10



===== A15 PAGE 7/10 =====
compensated at the end of the Department, for irregular/deficit supply. The contents of
Paragraph No. 17 and 18 of the Representation under reply, are false and are vehemently denied
in the manner stated. They have already been responded to in the preceding paragraphs. The
contents of Paragraph No. 19, 20 and 21 of the Representation under reply, are a matter of
record and therefore call for no reply. At the cost of repetition, it is stated that the liberty to
approach the Electricity Ombudsman was given by the Hon'ble High Court on the own asking
of the petitioner and since, the representation is even prima facie not maintainable before the
Electricity Ombudsman, as such it cannot be contended that in terms of the Order of the Hon'ble
High Court, the Electricity Ombudsman will have a jurisdiction to decide a matter, which it
originally lacked. The Representation under reply apart from having no merits, is not
maintainable before the Electricity Ombudsman. If the petitioner is so advised, it can file a suit
for damages or initiate a complaint in terms of UPERC (Standards of Performance)

Regulations, 2019.”

The Representationist, in its Rejoinder dated 11.06.2026 filed has submitted that Clause
8.4.4 of the UPERC (Standard of Performance) Regulations, 2019 empowers the Electricity
Ombudsman to entertain complaints relating to compensation. The Representationist has

further reiterated the submissions made under the representation.

The Respondent No. 2 Executive Engineer, MVVNL, Vidyut Vitran Khand-Tanda,
Ambedkar Nagar, in its Written Submissions dated 08.07.2026 filed has submitted as below: -

“The present Representation is not maintainable before the Hon'ble Electricity
Ombudsman, as the Electricity Ombudsman has no original jurisdiction to entertain disputes
relating to the consumers of energy. Furthermore, the disputes of the present nature are
fundamentally not maintainable before the Electricity Ombudsman. The Electricity
Ombudsman exercises strictly Appellate / Supervisory Jurisdiction over the decisions and
proceedings before the Consumer Grievance Redressal Forum (CGRF) and the Electricity
Ombudsman does not have any original jurisdiction to entertain the present complaint. The
petitioner's reliance on the order passed by the Hon'ble High Court in Writ-C No. 12243 of
2025 to establish maintainability is entirely misconceived. From a bare perusal of the said
order, it becomes clear that the petition was disposed of by the Hon'ble High Court in terms of
the undertaking given by the Counsel for the petitioner, to the effect that he wishes to withdraw
the Writ Petition with liberty to file a Representation before the Electricity Ombudsman. It

would be incorrect to suggest that the Representation is being filed under the direction of the

hu. Page 7 of 10



===== A15 PAGE 8/10 =====
Hon'ble High Court or that the same becomes maintainable as it is being filed pursuant to the
direction given by the Hon'ble High Court. The liberty to approach the Electricity Ombudsman
was given by the Hon'ble High Court entirely on the own asking of the petitioner. Since the
representation is even prima facie not maintainable before the Electricity Ombudsman, as such
it cannot be contended that in terms of the order of the Hon'ble High Court, the Electricity
Ombudsman will have a jurisdiction to decide a matter, which it originally lacked. The
Representation, apart from having no merits, is absolutely not maintainable before the
Electricity Ombudsman. If the petitioner is so advised, it can file a suit for damages or initiate
a complaint in terms of UPERC (Standards of Performance) Regulations, 2019. In the view of
the above, the Petitioner may be relegated to pursue the appropriate forum under the Uttar
Pradesh Electricity Regulatory Commission (Standards of Performance) Regulations, 2019 and

adhere to the scheme of the hierarchy of courts/authorities under the said rules.”

Heard both the parties and perused the submissions made in the present representation.
There was an issue regarding the supply of electricity to the Representationist’s unit. Until
20.11.2020, the production in the Representationist’s unit was running smoothly, as
approximately six hours of electricity was regularly supplied each day. However, thereafter, as
per the Representationist, the quantum of electricity supplied to the unit was drastically reduced
from six hours per day to two hours. It has also been submitted that the connection was supplied
from a rural feeder, and not from separate or industrial feeder. Due to this irregular supply, the
industry incurred losses and was finally shutdown. On an outstanding dues to the tune of Rs.

2,14,119/-, the permanent disconnection on 24.04.2023 was done by the licensee.

The Representation has been filed by the Representationist subsequent to withdrawal
of its Writ Petition from Hon’ble High Court, disposed of vide Order dated 09.01.2026 with
liberty granted to him to approach this Court. In the Representation, the Representationist has
prayed to compensate the complainant by paying him Rs. Seven Crores fifty lakhs by the
Licensee as losses which has occurred to it because of the poor electricity supply to its unit and
also prayed to restore the electricity supply of the unit and to ensure regular supply of electricity
from 09 A.M. to 05 P.M. per day for the unit. The Representationist has submitted that Clause
8.4.4 of the UPERC (Standard of Performance) Regulations, 2019 empowers the Electricity

Ombudsman to entertain complaints relating to compensation.

The Representation has been opposed by the Licensee on maintainability stating that

the petition was disposed of by the Hon'ble High Court in terms of the undertaking given by

baat Page 8 of 10



===== A15 PAGE 9/10 =====
the Counsel for the petitioner, to the effect that he wishes to withdraw the Writ Petition with
liberty to file a Representation before the Electricity Ombudsman. Thus, it would be incorrect
to suggest that the Representation under reply is being filed under the direction of the Hon'ble
High Court or that the same becomes maintainable as it is being filed pursuant to the direction
given by the Hon'ble High Court. As a matter of fact, the Representation under reply is not
maintainable before the Electricity Ombudsman as the Electricity Ombudsman has no original
jurisdiction to entertain disputes relating to the consumers of energy. It has been further added
that the Electricity Ombudsman exercises Appellate/Supervisory Jurisdiction over the decision
and proceedings before the CGRF and the Electricity Ombudsman does not have any original

jurisdiction.

The bare perusal of the order passed by the Hon'ble High Court makes it evident that the
writ petition was disposed of in terms of the undertaking given by the learned counsel for the
Representationist, whereby liberty was sought to withdraw the writ petition and to file a
representation before the Electricity Ombudsman. Accordingly, it would be incorrect to
contend that the present representation has been filed pursuant to any direction issued by the
Hon'ble High Court or that it becomes maintainable merely on account of such order.

_ Therefore, the representation is liable to be dismissed as not maintainable.

The Representationist has submitted that Clause 8.4.4 of the UPERC (Standard of
Performance) Regulations, 2019 empowers the Electricity Ombudsman to entertain complaints
relating to compensation. The Clause 8.4.4 of the UPERC (Standard of Performance)

Regulations, 2019 is reproduced as below: -

“In case the CGRF does not decide the amount of Compensation within the specified
time as per the CGRF and Ombudsman Regulations or the aggrieved consumer is not satisfied
with the decision of the CGRF, the consumer may approach Electricity Ombudsman who shall
deal and decide according to the CGRF and Ombudsman Regulations. The decision of
Electricity Ombudsman shall be final. In case of non-compliance of any order of CGRF or
Ombudsman by Discom the Consumer may approach Commission U/s 142 of the Act.”

The above provision clearly states that the consumer may approach Electricity
Ombudsman in case the CGRF does not decide the amount of compensation within the
specified time or the aggrieved consumer is not satisfied with the decision of the CGRF. In this
case, the Representationist has not exercised the remedy available at CGRF level which has the

original jurisdiction. It is further to clarify that the UPERC (Standard of Performance)

Me Page 9 of 10



===== A15 PAGE 10/10 =====
Regulations, 2019 has been made under Section 181 (1) and 181 (2) (za & zb) of the Electricity
Act, 2003 specially to provide compensation to consumer in case of deficiency in Standards of
Performance by the Licensee. The regulation provides detailed compensation mechanism and

process of claiming compensation under Clause 8.

Upon consideration of the above relevant provisions and the preliminary objections
raised by the Opposite Party, it is evident that the present dispute cannot be entertained directly
by this Court / Electricity Ombudsman. The Representationist is required, in the first instance,
to follow the process of claiming compensation using compensation mechanism as per the
provisions of Clause 8 of the UPERC (Standard of Performance) Regulations, 2019. Following
above, in case the CGRF does not decide the amount of compensation within the specified time
or the consumer is aggrieved with the decision of the CGRF, the Representationist would be at
liberty to prefer a representation before this Court / Electricity Ombudsman, as provided under

the applicable regulations.

In view of above, since the Representationist has not exhausted the process of claiming
compensation under statutory remedy available through UPERC (Standard of Performance)

Regulations, 2019, the present representation is not maintainable at this stage.

Accordingly, the representation is hereby disposed of with liberty to file afresh after

availing the appropriate remedy in accordance with law.

Dated: AR=T- 26, Sanjay Srivastava
Electricity Ombudsman, U.P.

EUAN EINE ERIE EEE EEE EEO RSH ARRAN AMAA EE EE CREE EE EELS LEER DENCE ERENCE PLES COEDS OEE ST EE TTDI EEE EB ERECT ESBS EEE EOE EER

Page 10 of 10
