

===== C20 PAGE 1/6 =====
ELECTRICITY OMBUDSMAN,
UTTAR PRADESH

Representation No. C-20 of 2026

He ve te te ke

Maa Shakumbhari Plastic Udyog Kumarhera, Dehradun Road, Saharanpur-247001 (U.P.)
through Proprietor Mr. Vipul Arora son of Mr. Kisan Lal Arora, resident of 75-A, Raipur Road,
Dehradun, Uttarakhand-248001

anneeanm Representationist

VERSUS

L. Paschimanchal Vidyut Vitran Nigam, through its Managing Director, Urja Bhawan,
Victoria Park Meerut-250001.
Zs Executive Engineer, Vidyut Vitran Khand-II, Paschimanchal Vidyut Vitran Nigam Ltd.,

Saharanpur.
— Respondents
Counsel of Representationist : Mr. Mohd. Rafi Khan, Lucknow.
Counsel of Respondent No. 2: Mr. Isar Husain, Lucknow.

ORDER

The instant Representation has been filed by Maa Shakumbhari Plastic Udyog
Kumarhera, Dehradun Road, Saharanpur-247001 (U-P.) through Proprietor Mr. Vipul Arora son
of Mr. Kisan Lal Arora, resident of 75-A, Raipur Road, Dehradun, Uttarakhand-248001, being
aggrieved by the Order dated 05.12.2025 passed by Electricity Ombudsman, Uttar Pradesh in
Representation No. 21 of 2025, which has been registered as Representation No. C-20 of 2026
dated 13.04.2026.

The Order dated 05.12.2025 passed by Electricity Ombudsman, Uttar Pradesh is as
follows: -

“Hence, the assessed units 200638 kVAH based on difference in meter readings of main
and double pole meter taken from MRI Reports for the period 01.12.2019 to 08.06.2020
calculated by the Licensee is correct. But this fact cannot be avoided that the defect of main
meter came to the knowledge of the Licensee only when the supply of the Representationist was

disrupted and Licensee checked the metering system to resume the supply on 08.06.2020. As

is Page 1 of 6



===== C20 PAGE 2/6 =====
per the provisions the Licensee should take monthly readings of both main & double pole meter
and raise the bill accordingly. If regular readings of both the meters had been taken by the
Licensee, then the defect of main meter could have been detected in the month of December-
2019 itself Since, it shows clear negligence in routine work of Licensee, the Representationist
should not be penalised. Therefore, it would be reasonable that the Licensee will not levy any

surcharge on assessed bill.
The Representation is disposed of.”
The representation was heard on 28.04.2026 & 11.06.2026 and Order was reserved.

The Representationist, Maa Shakumbhari Plastic Udyog Kumarhera, in_ its
representation dated 08.04.2026, has stated as follows: -

“The deponent is the occupier and in possession in abovementioned premises and
authorized to swear this affidavit and is well conversant with the facts deposed hereunder.
Applicant in the above matter and as such fully coversant with the facts & circumstances of
the case. This application seeks review of Order dated 05.12.2025 passed in Representation
No. 21 of 2025, whereby petitioner’s petition has been disposed by this Hon’ble Electricity
Ombudsman with following grounds and evidenc. Petitioner requested this Hon'ble Electricity
Ombudsman to use his power of review and may be exercised on the discovery of new and
important matter or evidence which, after the exercise of due diligence was not within the
knowledge of the person seeking the review or could not be produced by him at the time when
the order was made; that power of review will be exercised where some mistake or error
apparent on the face of the record is found. Opposite party had not any MRI report of the pole
meter as it was several time demaned by this Hon'ble Electricity Ombudsman during the
pendency and hearing of the petition and it is admitted fact that the wire of pole meter was not
connected with the connection. Every time opp party demanded for time with new excuses for
time in his official letter filed before this Hon'ble Electricity Ombudsman and unfortunately it
was overlooked in the Order passed by this Hon'ble Electricity Ombudsman Order dated
05.12.2025 passed in Representation No. 21 of 2025 this matter related to heavy financial loss
if it not treated as per law petitioner will face irreparable losses. Thus, in view of the above,
the following grounds of review are maintainable the review as stipulated by the statute: will
be maintainable: - on discovery of new and important matter or evidence which, after the
exercise of due diligence, was not within knowledge of the petitioner or could not be produced

by him. The petitioner noticed "No display" with interrupted electricity supply itself and

we Page 2 of 6



===== C20 PAGE 3/6 =====
reported in 08.06.2020. The Respondent himself has furnished in the counter that there was
"No Display" but it is not known how Kwh and units consumed have been recorded in the
consumer ledger. It is regretted to note that the Respondent has replaced the defective meter
on same day. MRI Report saying itself that "Status Ok" is not present on the MRI report and
reading comparison was filed by the opposite party. That till today opp party has not provided
complete MRI report of disputed period of both metering instrument. That till today opp party
has not filed MRI of pole meter of that disputed period and without MRI report of other pole
meter opp party demanding bill on fake presumption of self-made assessment, the difference
of 20638 kVAH Units reading which is not sustainable in the eye of law. The department found
two phase wire are not ok in the metering instrument, but they did not check pole meter because
pole meter was not found ok therefore, they are demanding Provisional demand as assessment
without follow the prescribed procedure just to harass the deponent showing in the bill is
without any evidence that concerned Executive Engineer did not follow the procedure
prescribed in U.P. Electricity Supply Code, 2005. It is stated that till today opposite party has
not filed MRI of pole meter of that period and without MRI report of pole meter opposite party
raising bill demand on fake presumption of self-made assessment of defective pole meter on
their own basis, on the average three months difference which is taking after disputed period
of any months is illegal and not sustainable in the eye of law. That Opposite party is not taking
average of three months average maximum reading prior to disputed period and not

multiplying with disputed month period.

It is most respectfully prayed that this Hon'ble Court may kindly be pleased to modify
its Order dated 05.12.2025 passed in Representation No. 21 of 2025 upto the extent that bill
will be made as per MRI report of disputed period if MRI report not available than reading
average maximum reading prior to disputed period and not multiplying with disputed month

period shall be taken.”

The Respondent No. 2 Executive Engineer, Vidyut Vitran Khand-II, Saharanpur, has
filed Prelimnary Objections dated 28-04-2021 and has stated as follows: -

“The application of the applicant is for recall of the final Order dated 05-12-2025
passed by this Hon'ble Authority after affording an opportunity of hearing to both the parties.
The present application is not filed under the provisions of law, CGRF and Electricity
Ombudsman Regulation have no provision for recall or review of the own order passed by the

Hon'ble Electricity Ombudsman, thus present application dated 05-05-2025 for recall of the

\U Page 3 of 6



===== C20 PAGE 4/6 =====
order is not maintainable in the eyes of law and deserves to be dismissed with costs. A bare
perusal of the Order dated 05-12-2025 it clearly shows that the order is passed after affording
an opportunity of hearing to both the parties and the copy of the judgment and order served
upon both the parties in time, the applicant filed the application dated 05-04-2026 after a lapse
of about 120 days, thus present application is without any provisions of law and without
complying the terms of the order and thus present application deserves to be dismissed and
may be so dismissed with costs. The as a matter of fact the applicant had an opportunity to file
writ petition if aggrieved against the order under the provisions of law, since the present.
applicant has not challenged the order passed by this Hon'ble Authority, the order has become
final and binding on the parties and thus present application deserves to be dismissed with
costs. This Hon'ble Authority has not reviewed its own Order in any of the case decided, any
application can be entertained only under the provisions of law in the instant application the
applicant has not mentioned any where under which provisions of law this application is filed,
thus present application deserves to be dismissed and may be so dismissed on this ground
alone. Wherefore, on the facts and circumstance of the present case, the application of the

petitioner deserves to be dismissed with cost in the interest of justice.”

During the course of arguments, the Representationist reitreted the present review
application seeking modification of the order dated 05.12.2025. The Representationist
submitted that this court may kindly exercise the power of review on the ground of discovery
of new and important facts and evidence which, despite due diligence, could not be produced
earlier. It was further submitted that the opposite party failed to produce the MRI report of the
pole meter. The Representationist also submitted that the wire of the pole meter was not
connected with the electricity connection and assessment was made demanding provisional
demand without following the prescribed procedure, therefore requested to recall /
modification of the Order dated 05.12.2025.

Per contra, learned Counsel for the licensee submitted during the hearing that while
deciding the order dated 05.12.2025, the aforesaid facts had already been duly considered by
this Court in Page No. 10 and Page No. 11 of the order. He further submitted that no new fact
or evidence has been produced by the Representationist in the present review application. The
facts now being relied upon were already within the knowledge of the parties and had been
duly considered by this Court at the time of passing of the original order. It was further

submitted that the present application has not been filed under any provision of law, as the

\ Page 4of 6



===== C20 PAGE 5/6 =====
CGRF and Electricity Ombudsman Regulations do not contain any provision for recall or
review of an order passed by the Electricity Ombudsman and therefore, the present application
seeking recall / review of the order is not maintainable in the eyes of law and deserves to be

dismissed with costs.

The Representationist has made this application for recall / modification stating that
the pole meter was not working properly and its MRI Report was not available for calculating
actual consumption. He has further stated that since the actual consumption was not available,
the Licensee has provisionally calculated the assessment for disputed period. The
Representationist has assumed above as new discovered facts which could not be produced by
him during the original proceedings. The assumption of the Representationist is not at all
correct as while deciding the case vide Order dated 05.12.2025, this Court has clearly observed
that the sealing certificate shows that the MRI of both meters were done on site and the pole
meter was working properly during the disputed period. Additionally, a detailed comparission
of MRI readings in the main and pole meter submitted by the Licensee has been produced in

tabular form on page no. 11 of the Order.

Under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (CPC), a Review is provided under Section
114 read with Order XLVII Rule 1: -

(1) Any person considering himself aggrieved—

(a) by a decree or order from which an appeal is allowed, but from which no appeal has been

preferred.
(b) by a decree or order from which no appeal is allowed.
(c) by a decision on a reference from a Court of Small Causes

And who, from the discovery of new and important matter or evidence which, after the exercise
of due diligence was not within his knowledge or could not be produced by him at the time
when the decree was passed or order made, or on account of some mistake or error apparent
on the face of the record or for any other sufficient reason, desires to obtain a review of the
decree passed or order made against him, may apply for a review of judgment to the Court

which passed the decree or made the order.

In the present review application, the applicant has failed to make out any ground as

contemplated under Section 114 read with Order XLVII Rule 1 of the Code of Civil Procedure,

L

Page 5 of 6


===== C20 PAGE 6/6 =====
1908. From a perusal of the record, it is evident that the issues and facts now raised by the
applicant / representationist had already been duly considered by this Court while passing the
order dated 05.12.2025, particularly in the page 10 and page 11 of the said order. No new fact
or evidence has been produced by the Representationist which could justify reconsideration of

the matter.

Accordingly, this Court finds no merit in the present application. The review / recall

he

Dated: ..)$.-0.6- 24 (Sanjay Srivastava)
Electricity Ombudsman, U.P.

application is hereby dismissed.

ene
Page 6 of 6
